

=== PAGE 1 ===

os

FOR

Seon liled frome & YEP we, Vl 4
GRAD US AD PARNA SSUM
p Written Or icine in Latin ul
Abny Mosk en EE TS
late chief Compoter to :
The Roman Emperor CHARLES Vi
OB hark ha vbvdithe Gf pean
MC the bef g mie a a / Plates in This Ppa

__Engray ed by J: Caulfield.

=: RS — London? Prrvted by Dad by Welhor fr" edie oho Z }

7


=== PAGE 2 ===

CHAPTER IL.
Of ox nlerpotnt, mM the Oampufition of a Bin

Counterpoint is divided into fumple ana figurative. the former is akind of Compo-
fition in. 2 or more parts, wherein the Notes in the different parts are of the fame value, and is cal-
led plain.or fimple from being Note againft Note in Concords only. We, mav chufe the Subject either
from our own Fancy or from a Church Tune; in the latter Cafe the Subject is called in Italian Can-
to fermo.

In, figurative Counterpoint the Notes in the different parts may be of different value,
and Concords intermixt with Difcords. When the Canto fermo or Subject is placed in the Lower
Parts, it.is called in Italian Contrapunto fopra il foggetto; and if in the Upper Parts,
Contrapunto fotto il foggetto.

Before we proceed, the following General Rules in Compofition willbe neceffary to be ob-

ferved with regard to the different motions in Mufick: viz. the Regular, Contrary and Oblique.

1 The Contrary and Oblique may be ufed in any Progreffion; but the Similar, only
when we.proceed from a perfect Concord to an imperfect, or from an imperfect to an imperfect:
in this Senfe only the gt ana S” are deemed perfect Concords,but the 3% ana 6th imperfect.

The reafon why the Similar motion in the Progreffion from a perfect and imperfect Concord to

a perfect. is not allowed of, is, to avoid the wrong progreffion of {ucceffive Fifths and Eights,whether |

open or hidden; the laf{t may be difcovered by the intermediate Notes contained within the Spaces,

as may be feen in the following Example.

Hidden Fifths Hidden Eights

Q we muft avoid proceeding to an Eight or Unifon by a Skip, that is when the lower Part -
afcends one degree and the upper defcends by a Skip though it be in the contrary motion. . =

3 An imperfect Concord is to be ufed preferably to a perfect, as the former is more
harmonious than the Latter. ,

4 The Notes muft be conformable to the nature of the Key. ;

& The Inharmonic Relation in Mi againft Fa is to be avoided as much as Poffible. ; cae

6 Regularity, Variety and good Melody muft continually he kept in View.

x


=== PAGE 3 ===

, 3
Now we proceed to the Compofition of Plain Counterpoint in 2 Parts only. the principal Foints
to be.obferved in this kind of: Compofition are as: follow:
a.Every note of the Canto fermo muft have its particular Concord. if it is in the lower part the
Intervals muft be taken upwards, and if in the upper part, then the Intervals muft be reckoned downwards.
6 We muft begin and end by a perfect Concord _
- ‘C. Tf the Canto fermo is in the lower part, the laft note but one requires the greater Sixth, and if in
the upper part, the leffer Third. fee the following Example in D. la. fol.re.

Counterpoint _ Canto won

Canto fermo " : ‘Councerpoine

Sao iq oe unter porit

This is a kind of Compofition where, 2 notes are fet againft one; it is ufed therefore in Binary
meafure confifting of 2equai parts the firft whereof is accented, and the other unaccented. Here the
firft Minum is to bé Concord, and the fecond may be either Concord or Difcord, The Difcord therefore
only is ufedina gradual Tranfition from Concord to Concord; but in Skips the Concord only can have Place.

iminutio

Diminuti

i" Rule If the Canto fermo is in the lower part, the two notes in the laft Bar but one mufthave a Fifth
for its firf{t note and a greater Sixth for its fecond note. But if in the upper part, then, the
firft note requires a Fifth and the other a leffer Third.

98 ——— Skips of Thirds in a Similar motion following one another muft be avoided, ag, mitsvould occafion
a forbidden progreffion of Fifths and Eights. fee Ex.1. Greater Skips as thofe ofa Fourth, Fifth
and Sixth are allowed, as it would not offend the Ear ‘a much. fee Ex. 2.

3! Rule when the Canto ferino i is in the upper part, a Minum Reft is to’ be ae at the beginning of:
an the Counterpoint inftead of the firft note. - -
4 ____— If the Parts fhould meet fo clofe together as not to leave fufficient room for the notes to move
in the contrary way, then in fuch Cafe a Skip of a Sixth or Eight is allowed to be ufed.



=== PAGE 4 ===

“=

gempcerpoint Canto fermo

eer ae 0. OC tame ST TA SaatortsS =a i
Haw acloustot=imr-\(omi\cumtmlorn a BS ed |
HAN TS SG A DT et WH A Oe |

anes fermo Counterpoint

In Triple Time when one note is fet againft three, the paiddllgmad 3 note may be Difcord,
pp eied it be in a gradual progreffion, :

Ex.

The Third Counterpoint.

Is a kind of Compofition where four Crotchets are fet againft one Semibreve. Here it muft be
ob ferved, that when five Crotchets follow one another gradually either rifing or falling, the firft, third
and fifth note are to be Concords, and the fecond and fourth Difcords. fee Ex. 1. But this is not
always the Cafe, as fometimes the fecond and fourth note may be Concords, and the third a Difcord by way
of filling up the {pace of a third. fee Ex.2. To explain which more fully we will reduce thofe Examples
to their original form Ex. 3. which will thew them to be regular Tranfitions. There is {till another
kind of Tranfition whichis when we proceed froma Difcord to a Concord by a Skip, and is called in
Italian Nota Cambiata, fee Ex.4. This Skip of a Third from the fecond to the third note fhould pro-
perly have been made from the firft to the fecond note, in which Cafe the fecond note would have been aSixth
or aConcord. fee Ex. 4. If one was to fill up this Space of the Third, it would appear as follows feeEx.6.
But as Quavers are not to be ufed in this Stile of Compofition, the former Example is thought to be pre-
ferable. It {till remains to be obferved, that if Canto fermo is in the lower part the laft Bar bct onemaft

be regulated as in Ex. 7. but if in the upper part, according tc the Ex. 8.

Canto £:



=== PAGE 5 ===

Note
The Flats are ufedin

this Example for fake
of avoiding the inhar-
monic Relation of the
Triton, which may be
practifed on any fimi-
lar occafion, not only
with Flats, but alfo. :
with Sharps. : binunilens vai

- ee

a ee
I eee ee a
rir Te si ee

ae aT he at

he Fourth Counterpoini

Is a kind of Compofition of two Minums to a Semibreve, where Syncopation of Notes chieflyis introduced.
Syncopation may be either of Concords or Difcords. If of Concords, both the accented and unac-
cented Part of the Meafure are Concords as may be feen Ex.1. But if of Difcords, the unaccented
note is to be Concord and the next accented note Difcord, fee Ex. .2. As in the preceeding Counter-
points Difcords were ufed only by way of Tranfition from Concord'to Concord; fo in this kind of Coun-

terpoint they bear a chief part in the Harmony, and as fuch muft refolve into the next fucceeding Concord
by falling one Degree, as in the laft Example.

138% JIG _ =. << & Ex, 2. 4 S LES
SL CS ES 2 SE ee Oe Oe
4 nn 1 ie Be © MO ee TEE 0 Ee ee se
Tae a a oe
Syncopation
Of ' Concords Difcords

If the Canto fermo is in the lower Part, the Second refolves into the Unifon, the Fourth into the
Third, the Seventh into the Sixth and the Ninth into the Eight. fee Ex.1. and it is to be obferved,-
that Difcords ‘in reality are ufed only as Retardations of Concords, which plainly appears from thofe
Examples where the fame Retardations ufed before are omitted.

Sa
| ae
nr EST
care
ay a
a = Te)



=== PAGE 6 ===

————— a _

o
We cannot for this reafon pafs from the Unifon into the Second nor from the Eight to the -
Ninth by way of Syncopation; as in that Cafe either two Unifons or two Eights would immediately

follow one another, which is dif{coverd in thofe Examples where Syncopations are omitted.

=

iva
Ua |
i

)
b

.If the Canto Fermo is in the upper part, then the Second refolves into the Third, the Fourth
into the Fifth, the Seventh into the Eight, and the Ninth into the Tenth. /

"The fame fame

inv Bee

.The following Rules concerning this Counterpoint in particular, are to be obferved.

1 Af the Canto. fermo is in the lowér part, the Seventh refolving into the Sixth,is to be ufed
in the Taft Bar but one. But if in the upper party the Second which refolves into the Third
and paffes afterwards into the Unifon.

Q" Syncopation is to be introduced in every Bar, as often as poffible, and as far as is confiftent

with regular Progreffion, Variety and Melody.

Countérpoint

Syncopations may {till be introduced in a different manner, as will be {hewn in the following -
Ex..1. where inftead of the ufual Mark of Syncopation a point is added to the Note in order to give a
| brifker motion to the Air or Song, which way of Syncopation is properly tobe ufed in the Counterpoint next

\


=== PAGE 7 ===

following. Befides this two more different ways may be ufed as in the Ex.2. or in Ex. 3. where it is’
to be obferved, that Quavers in fuch a Cafe only can be uféd on the fecond and fourth Crotchet of the
Bar. All thofe different ways of Syncopation are peculiar to the florid Counterpoint, which follows

for our next Confideration.

BO .WiGl i F108 Ly ar.a
BMS es | GR AS
Te

Is a Compofition which may be termed the ornamental and rhetorical part of Mufick, end confifts
of a Variety of Points, Syncopes, a mixture of Concords and Difcords and diverfities of Meafure, and
‘is in fhort a Mixture of all the various kinds of Counterpoints treated of already, and therefore is
called the figurate or florid Counterpoint.

We are only to obferve in this place, that (as it is contrary to the Rules of good Melody to inter-
rupt the continual Motion of a Song in the manner fhewn in the next Example, where two Crotchets
immediately following one another are put at the beginning of the Bar, without any Syncopation ,
which founds to the Ear as if the Song were drawing toa Conclufion) one ought to keep up a con-
tinual motion by ufing’either. Syncopation or adding two more Crotchets as is explained in the Example. |

Indifferent Better

A TS Oe | ee a sy eee Ot Ben hall
ETO a ee ee ee
[-# @ ~ j 3 om a eT

Counterpoint


=== PAGE 8 ===

= CHAP. II
Of COMPO STTION in 3 Parts.

Vist Counterp oint.

That.Compofition in 3 Parts is the moft perfect, is evident from the Harmonical Triad 1.3. 5.
being compofed of 3 Parts, which may be ufed without any additional note; for if any other note was.to be
added to it, it would be only repeating any ‘of thofe contained in the Triad. Ex.1. “ This Counterpoint
therefore is a Compofition of three equal parts againft one another, and is regulated according to the
fame Rules given above in the Compofition of two parts. What {till remains to be faid concerning. this
kind of Compofition will be contained in the following additional Remarks. .

1 The Harmonical Triad is to be introduced in every Bar, unlefs for certain reafons it fhould prove
impracticable; for fometimes another Concord as the Sixth or Eight is chofen inftead of it, for

fake of better Melody, or for fake of avoiding the wrong Progreffion of two Eights or Fifths im-

mediately following one another. fee Ex. 2. 3

QO" when the Bafs afcends gradually, fufficient Room muft be left between the Parts, in order to-

meet in the contrary motion. As in the Ex. 2.

8 The Rules concerning the different Motions are to be applied here likewife. This only is to.be
added, that the fame rules muft be obferved in the middle parts as well as the extreme. Yet in
Compofition of more Parts, in order to avoid greater Irregularities, thofe Rules cannot al-

ways be fo ftrietly: obferved. gin a

4 not ‘fd good 4 “not fo good

onwat a

Ex.1 2 A See le Syon 5 set fo good

y
(os

M

(ee

as ms
. q “
e @
tT a

Remarks to the Examples above
In.the Ex. 2. we find every thing agreeable to the Rules of Counterpoint given above, as metres '
regard to Melody, as with the proper Regulations and progreffions of the Parts. As to Ex.3 the pro-
greffion of the middle part from the firft Bar to the fecond is not fo regular, nor is the fame Variety ob-
ferved as in Ex.2. as A is ufed twice in the middle part, but in Ex.2. but once. InEx.4. the progref-
fion of the, 2 fuperior parts is wrong on account of the forbidden 58 But the progreffidn of the 52 to
the 8D ina fimilar motion as in the two laft Bars is allowed of, efpecially as it could not properly. be
avoided .fince the Tenth in this Counterpoint cannot properly be ufed at the Conclufion. In Ex.5.the
afcending Sixes ufed on the accented part are more difpleafing to the Ear than thofe ufed on the un-

accented,which have no place in this kind of Counterpoint.


=== PAGE 9 ===

4

We. proceed to an Example where the Parts will be difpofed in a threefold manner, fo that the.

Canto fermo will appear either in the extreme parts or in the middle.

eo recoded

To the ie Ex. Progreffions like that from the feventh Bar to the eighth, though contrary to the
Rules of Motion, cannot always be avoided in Compofition of thiee or more parts; for it we
had paffed from F. to C. in a contrary motion, an imperfect Concord would have proceede? to
a perfect in a fimilar motion, and the ninth note in the middle part would have formid an Uni-
fon with the Bafs, whereas a Unifon is lefs harmonious than an Eight. Befides we ough: not
in this kind of Compofition, to exceed the Compafs of the five Lines without neceffity, fee Ex.a,
Nor. would it have been rectified by the alteration fhewn in Ex.4. on account of the unnatyrs)
and.unmelodious progreffion by Skips.

To the 29 Ex. In the ninth Bar the Triad has not been ufed, according to the common Rules, as
the Eight in the upper part is preferable in point of Melody.


=== PAGE 10 ===

Second Counterpoint

Of two Minums againft one Semibreve in three Parts
Here muft be remembered what has been {aid of this Counterpoint in the Compofition of two Parts
and concerning the Harmonical Triad at the beginning of this Chepter, yet with this additional remark
that for fake of the Triad and for avoiding two Fifths fometimes, a Minum may {kip a Third as in Ex.l.

The following are the Examples relating to this Counterpoint in three different Situations. Ex. 2.3.

a Paes Ca or Oto St Pere tSt
LUPE nA Wo Lee RST eel RN Vo Maat Woe een RS Ge RS (i
a De ee ee

‘

ASE Soo OS

aT
a
,

1
wh

; Remarks ;
Firft Syncopation has been introduced towards the latter end of the Examples above contrary to.this
kind of Counterpoint as otherwife either a Unifon or Eight both being void of Harmony would
have been ufed inftead of it.
Second The Sharp Third at the end of the laft Example has been ufed in order to prevent two Fifths.

Sheard Counterpoint

Of four Crotchets againft one Semibreve.

As we purfue the fame Method in the Compofition of three Parts that has been ufed in that, of
two Parts, fo the fame Rules muft be obferved in refpect to this Counterpoint, with this difference
only, that whereas in the former four Crotchets were placed againft one Semibreve, fo in this pare
of Compofition four Crotchets are to be placed again{t two Somibreves.


=== PAGE 11 ===

il

What further remains to be obferved is that accented notes principally are to be regarded, and
that if the Harmonica] Triad cannot be introduced on the firft accented note, it ought to be fo at leaft
on the fecond and third. See the following Examples according to the different fituation of Parts ;
which’ alfo may be contrived in fuch a manner that one of the Parts may confift of Crotchets, the other

of Minums and the third of Semibreves. as in Ex. 5.

0

j=.

Bu
@)
CU

Canto fermo
yA)
teal
fi ee
i. wer

ae
| wT cife— Aa MiP:
rH

Canto fermo


=== PAGE 12 ===

ee (~. jp ? . ;
- Mouth Counterpornl
Of Syncopation

Here it will only be neceffary to fhew what is to be obferved with regard to the Concord of the
additional third Part; that it requires the fame Concord that would have been ufed if there had been
no Syncopation. fee Ex.1.2. The fame is to be underftood when the Bafs or lowermoft Part. fyn-
copes. fee Ex. 3.4. With regard to the two laft Examples it muft be obferved that the progref-
fion of the former feems to be wrong, as is plainly difcovered in the latter where no Syncopation
is ufed, . Such Succeffion of Fifths, if covered by Syncopation, is neverthelefs allowed of in Compo-

fition in the middle parts only, But the fame Licence cannot be allowable with regard to Eights,

becaufe an Eight is lefs harmonious than a Fifth. {ce Ex. 5. 6.

Here follow. the Examples. to this Counterpoint in a threefold Situation.
Ex. bse , — Se K> Ex. 2.~

(0

mill

ia
*
=a

ry]
Dy
a

IC
i.

Remark
In the third Bar of the firft Example a Difcord has been ufed inftead of a Concord on the unaccented ©
part of the Bar, contrary to the common Rule, which is not ouly allowable in fuch a Cafe when the
Bafs lies ftill, but alfo looked upon us an Elegance. fee Ex. 2, In the fixth Bar the7 is accompanyd
by an 8. becaufe fir it is part of the Subject itfelf, and fecondly Syncopation is to be introduced on
every Bar if poffible.

ff

l

a

:
Hell Ie



=== PAGE 13 ===

es
yy

Remark

In the laft Example above, a Reft has been put in the firft Bar of Bi Bafs,as no Syncopation coud
properly be introduced there, and as that Space could not be filled up by any other kind of Countezpoin¢,
which manner of proceeding in fuch cafe is allowed of in Compofition. Yet the Example’ above might
have been regulated as in the following Ex.1. which is rather preferable. Here the Counter Tenor in the
firft Bar, fupplies the part of the Bafs. The fame may alfo be practifed with the Tenor, and occafionally e-
ven with the Treble. Another Inftance where a Reft is properly applied,fee in the Examples 2. 3. where
it appears that two hidden Fifths, which in this part of Compofition in particular cannot be allowed of,
are entirely prevented by means of that Reft.

Nothing oa remains to be obferved,: but what has been mentioned already with regard to th
Counterpoint in the Compofition of two parts, in particular, ‘and all the Rules given above are likew “fe fo
be applied fo far as the nature of this kind will permit. We obferve here only in particular, that the ufe

of the Contrary motion in almoft every Bar. will greatly contribute to render this kind of Performance eafy.

bia ana a
2 a eteeé
i SSS SESS = po oe



=== PAGE 14 ===

14.

CHAR iH,
wide COMPOSITION o of <P
rt eg Counterpoint

Note againft Note

Here the additional fourth Part is no more than Doubling a Concord contained in the Harmoni-
cal Triad already, fome few Chords excepted. :All the Rules concerning the Progreffions and Motions
1aid down in the foregoing Chapter, muft be obferved as much as poffible, fo that a juft reference and
Proportion ought to fubfift not only betwixt the extreme but alfo between all the different Parts.
In what Order Concords naturally muft be placed, may be known from the Harmonical Divifion of the 8:
From that Divifion arifes the Fifth, from that of the Fifth arifes the Third, From hence follows that the
Fifth is to be placed below, but the Third uppermoft; which order is to be obferved in the combination of
Concords, unlefs for particular reafons, as for inftance for fake of a proper Progreffion from one.Bar to
another it fhould be found impracticable. :

We proceed to the Examples according to the different Situation of Parts, where we fhall find every
Rule relating to this Counterpoint obferved as far as the nature of the Subject willadmit of. fee Ex.1.2.34.

=! ele oe oS | (2 ae

7 a tao ere rer PS So 6-pet |
(hen ek £_™~ Lew be helnh_abre ae. A BH NN |
mess) SS SS Stace eS Si [ee ee a

aT
a
=

cy

b
i
)

ad



=== PAGE 15 ===

SoHo Counterpoml qe

Whatever has been mentioned concerning this Counterpoint in’ the Compofition cf three Parts, is alfo
to be applied here, fo far as the nature of this kind will admit of. fee Ex. 1,2,3,4,

(0
Hi

H1OaR, SS on s

an oe a ae eee oe a ee

Oo™ eH
S55 a

i

)

Perl

 y— -o-- Se 8 PAT . a YO We Ek — 2 Bel
iE AS ee CME On EOFS. 3 ll its ee
Win GE eee eee

Third Jy

of ede Crotchets againft one Semibreve

Here likewife is to be sffllica’ what has been obferved relating to this Counterpoint in the Compo-
{ition of two and three Parts, and what further remains will be explained in the Examples .' .



=== PAGE 16 ===

yo
Remarks

r If inftead of doubling the 34 as inthe fourth Bar, the Unifon had heen ufed, not only the Harmony
would have been deficient, as the Unifon ufed on the accented Note feems to he void of Harmony, fee
Ex. @. but alfo the Third or Decime being a paffing note in the Treble would have been deficient as
it would have been but imperfectly percieved on account of its fhort duration. ‘

24 the: Progreffion between the Tenors in the eighth Bar feems to be contrary to the Rules of Moties

° but could not be avoided, as in this Counterpoint we are confined to four Crotchets. Howeverit could
“bé ‘rectified by dividing the Semibreve in the Counter Tenor as in Ex.6. This alfois to be underftood .
with regard to the preceeding kinds of Counterpoint, where for the fame reafon feveral little Irre-
gularities have been futfered to pafs. Now follow the other fituations of the Example above.

aS Pe 4 AAG lee Be 2
Le Rae 6 jee mer ey
[ea ae a einen

Ce oie ete 18 ree be tet

a 1 @

(

it
@)
ii



=== PAGE 17 ===

k a Semibreve for

Notes,are S
dbyaS Ex.de. for otherwife

In this kind of Counterpoint it is fometimes neceffary to brea

is accompany

C1 pout

Colusdé

of Difcords muft remain in the Refdlution. For In-

Of Syncopation
In Compofition of four Parts the fame’Rules concerning the, Accompanyment of Difcords areto be

obferved which h

for Inftance when the 7. 6.

been laid down in Compofition of three Parts, which imply that the fame Concords

Hour

ave

5
3s

‘6. ¢. which Examples plainly fhew it to be the fame Concords whether the

}

fake of proper Refolution, as

if

ye

that are required to accompany in the Syncopation,
copated or not:

ftance Ex..a,

ATT oT Teh

ca
hor

ee al rl t

TA ty

not always be properly
ng Ex. 12.5384. ;

ny could

2 ee |__|
PS He f
Ff A a - a
A eH

(

ini
; ae
HL 9 ,

ae
Cua

will be more fully explained in the follo

onfift entirely of Semibreves

8

,
iG

— he Omi eu:

the Accompanyment was to ¢
difpofed according to.Rule, a



=== PAGE 18 ===

18

Note. According to the Obfervation above we find in the fixth Bar of the firft Example, that the accen-
ited note wants the Accompanyment ofa 5! which neverthelefs belongs to the full Harmony. .
"In the fifth Bar of the laft Ex: the 24 is doubled and the 6™ left out which properly fhould accompany
24 and 44 fee Ex.a. But in the fixth Bar of the fame Ex. the 4th has been doubled inftead of the 2!
whereas the 24 is rather to be doubled, as by the Refolution the latter becomes a 34 an Interval that is
more harmonious than that of the st” which is produced by doubling the 4th fee Ex. 6.

better -

| Whatever is to be obferved with regard to this Counterpoint in four Parts is contained already in the ~
fame Counterpoint in the Compofition of 2 & 3 Parts, to which it refers, as may be feen from Ex.1. 2. 3,4.

»}

ci



=== PAGE 19 ===

Fourth

oo 2 Se NE ee

Difcords may
e 3 the

h

o
©
Bg
oot .
ay
HE -
sie -
oe
of
o
i
| ss
. 2
I 2
o O°
-
| . 2
. ates
| og.
a gi.
oY
2 oe 2
qe
Og
2S ex
og
°c 06
ork
SC HM
= 0.0
AO Se
w om 0
©
Foe
a
OH 2
ae
g #3
mo
o FS
9 moe
©
ee
ase oe
eee (2
eal
As
© %
4) Se
gan
on ao - ;

be refo
into



=== PAGE 20 ===

20

CHAP. TVs
Of Imitation.

When the f{ucceeding Part follows.the preceeding after fome Paufes or Refts in the fame Intervalls
without being either confined to’whole or half Tones, or to the Key, we call it Imitation.
It is not required that every note of the preceeding part fhould be imitated, which is peculiar only to to
Canons; but is {ufficient if only fome part of a Subject is imitated... It is ‘likewife to be obferved that
Imitation is ‘rathér to take place’in the middle than in the beginning ‘of a Compofition, as in the middle
it need not fo {trictly be confined to the Key. Laftly it may begin with any Initerval, as the Unifon,Second,
‘Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seyenth and Eighth, as will be fhewn in the following Examples.

\ f

In Unifon . \ In the Second



=== PAGE 21 ===

to

CHAP. V.

The Fugue is a kind of Compofition where the following Part repeats fome notes of the former
by the fame Intervals and by the fame Species of whole or half Tones, and where one is ftrictly con-
fined to the Rules of the Key. Every Key is determined by the compafs of a 4@ ond 58 contained
within the Eight, according to the limits whereof the Subjects of Fugues muft be regulated. fee. Ex.1.
That is.when the firft Part takes up the extent of a 5 the fucceeding muft not exceed the limits of the
Key, but remain within that of a Fourth and vice verfa. fee Ex. 2. 3. But in Imitation we are not confined
to this Rule, as it is fufficient when the fucceeding Part imitates the firft by the fame Degrees or Skips,
fee Ex.4. Laftly the Fugue muft begin with fuch Intervals only as conftitute the Key, which are the Unifon
Eighth and Fifth. But Imitation may begin with any Interval as has been mentioned already.

ESS Sea
PO a CT
|

i =| ia

The following is a thom but regular Method how to Compofe a Fug ue in two Parts.

Firft choofe a Subject fuitable to the Key you intend to Compofe in, and write down your Subject
in that Part’wherewith you intend to begin. This done and having firft examined your Subject whe-
ther it.be conformable to your Key, if fo, repeat the fame notes in the fecond Part either inthe Fourth
or Fifth, and whilft the Second Part imitates the firft wherewith you have begun, put fuch notes in the
firft Part as will agree with your imitating Part according to the Direction given in the Figurate or
Florid. Counterpoint, and after having continued your Melody for fome Bars, regulate the Parts
thus, that the firft Cadence may be made in the Fifth of the Key. Then refume your Subject
moftly. in the fame Part you have begun with, but by another Interval, after having firft put a
Reft of a whole or half Bar, which however may be omitted in cafe there fhould happen to be
a great Skip inftead of it. After this endeavour to bring in your Second Part after fome Reft
and that before the Subject of the firft Part draws towards a Conclufion, and having carried. on
your Subject a little longer, make your fecond Cadence in the Third of the Key. Laftly in-
troduce your Subject again in either Part and contrive it fo that one Part may imitate the other
fooner than at firft, and if poffible after the firft Bar, whereupon both Parts are to be united
and the Fugue finifhed by a final Cadence. _ a _

See the following Fugue, on the next Page, where the Subject is eon from our ufual

Example, in which every thing relating to the Direction above is exemplified.

,


=== PAGE 22 ===

99 &
Hus tie» 2

al OE fl
2 i eee
MEMES ne Ma 2

otlt

As in the foregoing Example the fucceeding Part anfwered the Subject of the firft in the.
above.it, fo in'the following Fugue the fame Subject will be anfwered by the fucceeding Part in the
4‘? below it,agreeably to the Rule given above; That if one Part takes up the extent of a 5%" the

following muft not exceed the limits of a 4 and vice verfa.

ae
SS A A A A =
AL SLOSS ON A DRE a MANN Wn Toe

ee =

a OS BY ek © | Ye
=i 1 2 A ee ee A > A OP A DE | ch Lee
| Ea PA A QT (a ON ee ee ey

Note. The notes of the Subject towards the end of the Example above appear with fome alteration —
by being introduced by way of Syncopation; whichis not only allowed of in Compofition, but is
thought rather to have an agreeable effect. Sometimes neceffity requires a Divifion-of notes
when otherwife the Subjects cannot be clofely united.

The following is an Example of a Fugue in the Key of A.

a
A TL a ON OO
1f StORtr Se. tee lee
Cg Se Sa]

lam las
MM Ta Ome Mi.
I Se2bS43L oor sao
E10 Si

BOLT Gea be



=== PAGE 23 ===

: ?

23

Note, In the firft and fecond Bar in foregoing Example, the Second E.¥, in the firft Part is imitated by a
Third A.C.in the anfwer, as there was no other way of making the notes of the Anfwer by the fame
Species of half and whole Tones; for if the anfwer had been made by the Semitone A. B. in imita-

tion of E.F, in the beginning part, it would have been in an improper Key.

Whatever is to be obferved in Compofition of three Parts (efpecially with regard to the Harmonical
Triad) muft alfo be applied in this Cafe. It therefore remains to be fhewn what Points are to be con-
fidered in relation to a Fugue in three Parts. All thofe Rules given above for compofing a Fugue.in two
Parts muft likewife be applied here, untill fuch times only as the third Part is introduced, which may be
done after both Parts have finifhed their Subjects, or after the addition of fome notes which fome Compo-
fers joyn to the Melody of the Subject, according as circumftances require, which in fuch Cafes always de-
pends on the proper judgement of the Compofer. But in order that the third Part might not appear alto-
gether infignificant, Care muft be taken to bring it in by way of a Triad or by Syncopation ofa Difcord;
the laft of which is reckoned to be rather more {killfull.

With regard to the Interval wherewith the third Part is to begin and follow either of the two Parts,
it is to be obferved that for fake of Variety, as being a material point in Compofition, it generally muft ©
aniwer to that part wherewith One has begun the Subject. But if from the nature of the Parts it
fhould appear to be more proper to been with another Interval, it is entirely left to the Difcretion
of the Compofer. :

As to Cadences, their ufe in the Fugue of three Fares is different from that in two Parts, for
no Formal Cadence may be ufed that ends with a fharp Third, as on fuch the Subject cannot be brought
in, But if-it fhould appear practicable, fo that the Subject may be conveniently brought in, both For-
mal and Fictitious Cadences may be introduced not only in the 5) or 3% put alfo in other

Intervals that are not too remote from the nature of the Key.. A Formal Cadence clofes by means

of a fharp Third and paffes afterwards into the Eighth. fee Ex. @. Buta Fictitious Cadence inftead
of a fharp Third ufes a flat Third whereby the Ears, which naturally expect a formal Cadence, are decieved
fee Ex. 6, Such a Formal Cadence may be avoided by keeping the fharp Third in the upper pa: whilft the
Bafs choofes another eora inftead of the Eighth. Ex. c.

The Ufe of fuch Cadences as defcribed in the laft Ex. ¢. is reckoned to be ftill more elegant in the
Compofition of more Parts. fee Ex.1.2.on the next Page. A Formal Cadence may alfo be introduced in
fome unufual Interval by means of the Subject itfelf, as will appear in Ex. 3. which will thew, not only
how in fuch Cafe the Formal Cadence is to be regulated on the firft note of the Subject, but alfo the
Accompanyment of the other Parts, and the fourth Ex. will fhew us a Cadence which will appear ou

the fecond note of the Subject.


=== PAGE 24 ===

ald

Such Formal Cadences are not only allowed of in Compofition, but alfo deemed fine & fkillfull

Having fhewn how Cadences are to be interwove with the Subjects of a Fugue we will fubjoyn ano-
ther Example which is to fhew how Cadences thus intermixt with the Subject are to be avoided in the fun~
damental Part by means of a {harp Third, we will choofe for that purpofe the ufual Subject. Ex.1. 2.

Here it will be proper to fhew the Reafon 1. why Cadences feem to be more frequently ufed in.Com-
pofition of two Parts than of three. It therefore is to be noted, that thofe ufed in two Parts are in their
nature different from Formal Cadences, as they confift only of the 7. 6. or 2 & 3. being of fhort duration
and rather looked upon as Preparations to Formal Cadences than Formal Cadences themfelves Ex.@ &O. and
become fuch only by the additional 39 Part, as will appear in Ex. ¢. Secondly, why a Formal Cadence
may be ufed only on the Introduction of the Subject and no otherwife. Here it muft be confidered that aFornal
Cadence. implies a Clofe and as fuch cannot be properly ufed but at the End or at the Conclufion of a Subject,in
order to indicate the approach of a new Subject. But the Subject introduced on a Formal Cadence denotes the

Clofe to be ftill at diftance, and at the fame time keeps up the uninterrupted moticn in this kind of Compofition.

Before we procced to the Example of the Fugue in three Parts it will be ucceffary to fhew how to
Compote a fundamental Part to two Parts in a defcending Progreffion hy 7, 6, and 2.3. whirehy thePro-

gre{fion of the different Parts willbe made cafier. fee Ex.1 &2. From which it appears that a 5. & 6.


=== PAGE 25 ===

2a

may be caken together and that the 7th refolves into the 6. and the 2¢ into the 84 ‘The fame is to

be underftood of the 4th ge sth when they Jay ready beforehand.

il
o.

acs
SOO aia
peo io
Lis

i
HO}

qT 3
OI

D

ie
Ys
1 at
I

OL
[

[|
a | a
St LO J ree
—

Explanation of the Example

In the Compofition of this Fugue the fame Method has been obferved as in that of two Parts till
the Introduction of the third Part which the two upper Parts accompany by a. proper Harmony during
the continuance of the Subject. Whereupon the Tenor refumes the Subject, yet in an Interval differ-
ent from that at the beginning, whilft the lowermoft Part accompanys the fame. Meantime the Treble
re{ts and prepares itfelf to be introduced again by another Interval different from that at the he-
ginning, fo as to indicate the approach of the Subject by means of a {trong Difcord, after which theClofe
is made by means of a leffer Sixth. Now the Tenor refts three Bars, partly becaufe the upper and lower
fart meet fo clofe together fo as not to leave convenient Room for the Tenor and partly becaufe the
Tenor itfelf is foon after to refume the Subject. Further it muft be noticed, that the Tenor may alfo
be brought in by a oth & 6th which has much Effect in Compofition. Laftly the manner of bringing .in

the Counter Tenor and its Contra Harmony built upon it, deferves particularly to be noticed.


=== PAGE 26 ===

i ae Ll be MN

4
C

Concerning the additional fourth Part we-muft refer to the Counterpoint in 4 Parts where every thing
neceffary to be obferved has been {ufficiently treated of already. It therefore remains only to be fhewn, at-
ter which.of the 3 Parts the 4% is to follow. | Though it is generally left to the Difcretion of the Compofer
yet it is the common Rule, eftablifhed by Cuftom, that the Counter Tenor is to follow the Treble andthe Bafs
the Tenor; and we further muft obferve, that as the number of Parts encreafes, proper Care muft be taken not

to crowd them in fuch a manner that there fhould not fufficient Room be left for the other Parts to proceed

properly, but if inadvertently the Parts fhould happen to be thus fituated, the Compofer muft either alter his
Defign, or one Part muft reft till fuch time as it may conveniently be brought in again to be united with the

Subject. .Yet it always willbe more expedient to order and regulate the Parts thus at the Beginning with-
out being put afterwards under a Neceffity of altering a Plan once laidout. The following Rules,if well
obferved, will greatly prevent any miftake of this kind, which are Tf eat by Compofing one Part, One muft
at the fame time keep in view the other Parts. 24 To leave fufficient Room for a free Progreffion. and a

good Melody between the feveral Parts fee the following Example.

Ore aye

Ira
be) eee a

oS Fo oe RSSOFS i= a 1
aS fe os | | |
cn Yl ef a
—

Note. Itis not requifite in Compofition of four Parts that a continued Harmony of 4 Parts fhould be kept on
throughout the Piece as it is f:fficieat if fome of the Parts do proceed whilft one or the other refts,in

order to refume afterwards the Subject; and if towards the Conclufion fome additional notes ure intro-

duced, when all 4 Parts meet together to fillup the Harmony.

Before we proceed to Fugues of more than one Subject, it will be neceffary firft to treat of the
Double.Counterpoint, as one of the moft material Articles in Compofition in general, and efpecially

in Compofition of Fugccs where more Subjects are introduced.


=== PAGE 27 ===

Ca Double Courlel poi: in Contral

This is a kind of artfull Compofition where the Parts are inverted in fuch a manner that the
uppermoft. becomes the lowermoft, and vice verfa. fo that without any other alteration in this
Cafe a double Melody arifes different from the other both inrefpect to Gravity as Accutenefs.
Some Authors mention different Species, fuch as the Double Counterpoint in the Third, Fourth,
Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, Tenth and Twelfth, which however we will pafs over, partly as their Ufe is
immaterial on account of their being confined to narrow limits, and partly as they differ but lit-
tle from the other; and treat only of fuch as are more fignificant and ufefull in Compofition, as
for Inftance the Double Counterpoint in the Eighth the Tenth and Twelfth.

The following general Rules relating thereto are to be noticed

‘T* tn order te diftinguifh the Subjects more properly from one another a Diverfity Baan to

fubfift in the Progreffion of the Subjects that is it ought to be contrived fo that one Part a

may .confift of Longer and the other of fhorter notes by that means the Difference in the
Parts will be made perfpicuous and all manner of Confufion avoided.

- 24 The Subjects muft be regulated thus that one Part is to follow the other after fome reft,

but never to begin together at one Time.

3° One muft not exceed the Limits prefcribed in every kind of Double Counterpoint.

Uf te Counterp oUt in the Lo coi

This.is a kind of Compofition where by the Inverfion of one Part into the Eighth above or
below a different Harmony muft arife, but fuch as is confiftent with Rules. The chief Rules to
be obferved in this part of Compofition are as follows:

lf ‘The Fifth muft be avoided as by Inverfion it becomes a Fourth.

O24 it is not allowed of to pafs into the Eighth by a Skip, as by Inverfion it becomes a Unifon
_Ex.1. for the fame reafon the Eighth cannot be ufed on the accented part of the Meafure,
but anly in Syncopation .

8 One muft not exceed the Limits of the Eighth, as otherwife the fame Intervals would. be
produced and confequently the fame Harmony. For by exceeding the Eighth the fimple In-
tervals are thereby changed only into compound ones, which are one and the fame thing with

the other as to their nature and differ only in point of Place or Situation. Ex. 2.

~~ . . Inverfion |

Fx 1 Ex 2

The following Rows of Figures placed oppofite to one another, will fhew at one View, into

what Concords and Difcords Notes are changed by way of Inverfion.

2) We. 4. Se 6m 7. 8.
Bh to Ba Bo 4h 8 Gop Aguals : :


=== PAGE 28 ===

28

From hence it appears that by Inverfion the Unifon becomes an Eighth, the Second a Seventh,
the Third a Sixth, and the Fourth a Fifth,and fo on. Of the Inverfion in the Eighth above it. feeE«1.
and of that in the Eighth below it. Ex.2. And the following Ex. 3, will fhew that Inverfion may
alfo have place in Syncopation.

Ex. 1. Ex. 2. Ex. 3. _—, Inverfion

We proceed now to the Examples relating to this Part of Compofition, in the firft whereof
the ufual Subject or Canto fermo will be chofen.

LH
lo)
LL

ad AL ery

us
OI
LL

If the Counterpoint is compofed in that manner that the contrary or oblique Motion is obferved
on every. accented part of the Bar, then the fame may be turned into aTrio by tranfcribing only the Coun-
terpoint.and tran{pofing the fame into the Tenth below it, as in the following Example.

————- eam
Se

|

The following Example will be a convincing Proof of the great Ufe the Double Counterpoint
js of in Compofition, which will be exemplified in a Fugue, where the manner how to infert a Contra
Subject, and how it is to be carried on through the whole Fugue, will be fully fhewn.


=== PAGE 29 ===

va pS 6 PO
Zz

t

|

eos pee OS ee SORES

Pe Wt) ie era TO
Ea Fos 2 eee eE.
aE ER

Ki

rl A

[

0)

Explanation

The Contra Subject begins after a R: {t, and becomes changed into an Eighth by the Inverfion of
the Parts,as may befeen at N° 1.2.6.4.5. where the Contra Subject always anfwers the main Sub-
ject (now in the extreme and now in the middle parts) by the Eighth, from which Diverfity always a
different Harmony arifes.

Take notice alfo of the artful Contrivance where the threc Upper parts imitate the Contra Sub-

ject at N° 6. in order to contract the fame after the Main Subject is dropped.

2


=== PAGE 30 ===

30.

The fame might have been done with both Subjects, and the final Cadence made afterwards by
altering only the Value of fome note or other, as in Ex.1. And it is further to be obferved,that
the Contra Subject need not always be introduced on the firft Bar of the Main Subject, but that
for Variety's fake it may alfo be brought in, either in the fecond or third Bar, according as the na-
ture of the Main Subject will admit of. fee Ex. 2.

(0)

ial

i
(0)
Hi

(0)
Hi

Ss

GF th, Double C, ounterpomn /

and its Tranfpofition into the Decime

This is a kind of Compofition where one of either Parts may be Tranfpofed into the Decime a-
bove or below it, by leaving out fome Concords and Difcords, the Subject remaining in its Place.
The following Row of Figures, placed againft one another, will fhev- what Intervals are to |e avcided.

lL 2 8% 4 = 5. 6 7% 8 9 id.
WG 6 bh 7h a Ge 4 ah BS Ie

From hence it is evident that two Thirds and two Tenths cannot foliow one another ina regula'r
motion, as the former would become Eighths and the latter Unifons by Inverfion; nor two Sixes, aa by
the Inverfion to the Tenth, two Fifths would arife. Further the Fourth cannot be ufed in the upperFart
in Syncopation, as by Inverfion it becomes a Seventh, Laftly the Himits of a Tenth muft not be exceed-

cd, fee Ex.1. and the fame Example tranfpofed into the Decime whil{t Canto Fermo remains in its Place. Ex.2.


=== PAGE 31 ===

The fame may be effected by raifing only the Canto fermo aThird and lowering the Counterpoint
an Eighth. The reafon of which is, becaufe two notes added to the Eighth become Tenthe. The very
fame Counterpoint may alfo be performed in three Parts by tranfcribing only the Canto fermo note by
note and tranfpofing the fame into the Tenth below it without any alteration in the two Parts. fee Example.

_This likewife may be applied to the firft Ex..of this Counterpoint, where the latter is tranfcribed into
the Decime whilft the Parts below remain as they are. fee the firft Example in the next Page.

Example

1 Ps OD CS Co

In this manner any Compofition in two Parts of this kind may be changed into a Trio, efpecially
when the. Contrary or Oblique Motion is applied on every accented part of the Bar, inthe manner
fhewn in the laft Examples. To explain it more fuliy, we will fubjoyn an Example of a different Sub-
ject from the ufual, which by Tranfpofition into the Decime becomes a Trio.



=== PAGE 32 ===

Remark. In this Example and the firft in the preceeding Page the Notes feem neither to begin nor to
end in the Key, yet they are fuch as are related to it; befides it muft be noticed, that thofe Examples
are given rather for fake of fhewing the nature of Inverfion, than for imitation. Nor is it required
to apply Inverfion at the beginning of a Compofition, but after a Subject,conformable to the Key
another may be introduced, fuch as may admit of Inverfion into the Decime which the Compofer
may invert at fuch a Place as he may judge to be moft practicable and convenient, all which will be
exemplified hereafter by a Fugue. But in cafe Inverfion fhould be ufed at the beginning, then
we muft begin with the Third or the Unifon of the Key, whereby the Part inverted will remain with-
in the Bounds of the Key, as has been fhewn already in fome of the Examples above.

By the Tranfpofition of the Treble in the following Example into the Eighth below and the Third above
will be produced a regular Compofition of three Parts.

Tran{pofitio in 3° - fuperior:

By the Compofition of this Counterpoint in four Parts it muf{t be obferved that the additional fourth
Part muft either reft or the Vacancy muft be filled up by extending or lengthening the Melody, or the Subject
‘muft be introduced by contrary Motion, or in any other manner as may be confiftent with Rules.

The following Example will partisularly thew the proper Ufe of this Counterpoint in Compofi-
tion. fee Ex.1. Here the Contra Subject feems to belong to thie Counterpoint in the Eighth, as
it may be inverted,to the fame; but that it may likewife be inverted to a Decime, and con fequently

rendered a Trio, will be proved in Ex. 2. from which it is evident; that both Counterpoints may


=== PAGE 33 ===

33

righ Xi;
be united together. The fame may alfo be practifed, if we raifes the Contr: bject an Eighth,
whereby it will be lowered a Third, as will appear in Ex. 3.

ry
For farther Explanation we muft refer to the following Example (being a Fugue compofed after
the Counterpoint in the Decime) and the Remarks added thereto.



=== PAGE 34 ===

Remarks to the foregoing FUGUE

The Examples at N° 1, 2. 3. feem not to correfpond with the nature of that Counterpoint, as
the Contra Subjects do not proceed by Tenths but by Thirds and Sixes. But we muft obferve,that —
neverthelefs it is grounded upon it; for undoubtedly if that Example had been Compofed in the manner
as in Ex. a. 6. it would exactly have correfponded with it. But as by taking of Tenths as at NO 1. '
in the Fugue, the Counter-Tenor, and at N° 2. the Tenor would have been deficient in Harmony, fo
for that reafon Thirds below it have been taken inftead of it. At N° 3. Sixes have been taken, for
fake of connecting the Parts more clofely, which properly fhould ays as inEx.¢. The fame is to
be underftood of thofe Notes at N° 6. At N° 4. and 5. after the Reft the Subject has been in-

troduced by way of Inverfion, agreeable to the Rule “Fhat after the Reft the Subject muft follow
either in a regular way or by Inverfion.

Va the. Lotlle Cotter COI, U0: theL wadevima or Sie Me:

In this part of Compofition one of the two or three Parts may be inverted to a Twelfth above or
below it. The following Rows of Figures will fhew what Intervals are to be ufed or avoided.
De 3. 4.5 6m 7. GS ene
1. Tl Ws OR SG he oe Bo 4b, hb S85 Ik
It appears from hence that any Interval but that of the 6 and 7 refolved into the 6 may be ufed
in this Counterpoint. But we muft not exceed the Compafs of a Twelfth. As this Counterpoint may be ap-
plied to Compofition of 2, 3 or 4 Parts; it will be proper to draw out particular Examples for that purpofe.

Example of Counterpoint mm Duodecime for two Parts. .

Explanation
The Treble Part ends with a Sth inftead of the 8? in order that the Tranfpofition of the Coun-
terpoint might be more conformable to the Key; though it is not contrary to the Rules of this Coun-

tcrpoint for the tranfpofed part to exceed the Limits of the Key.


=== PAGE 35 ===

Q
?

«

Nod

«

Note. the Counterpoint is to be inverted thas, that the Treble Part may come to be placed inthe

Duodecime below it, and Canto fermo to remain in it’s Place.

This alfo may be practifed in a different way, which is, by placing the Counterpoint in the Eighth
below it, and the Canto fermo a Fifth above it.

(i Ee See
—————

DM
+ re ot Soenl eo ae

|_| 2 Ee 0 es (oR ea
eo Se SS es a SS SSS SS Se SS es SS

It appears from the Example above as if by Inverfion the Compofition was changed into a differ-
ent Key;. but it is not only to be confidered, that it is into fuch a one only as ftands in Relation to the
Principal Key, but alfo that the fame Cafe will be quite different in Compofition of more Parts, where
a Formal Cadence may be regulated entirely according to the Keys when after the Clofe of the Can-

a

to ane fome additional part of Melody is fubjoyned.

Example of a Counterpoint in Duodecima, which by the addition of
the Counterpoint in Decima becomes a Trio.

Cas
Pe pe --e- vawiena-
Ss

Now we will tranfpofe the Counterpoint in ES Drodachine below it, whilft Canto fermo. remains

in its place, and the fame Counterpoint in the Decime above it, whereby a Trio will be formed. .

nN



=== PAGE 36 ===

In this Counterpoint,in two Parts, the following additional Rules with regard to the forming of ;
' it into a Trio, will be neceffary to be obferved. :

- jt That it muft begin and end with a Fifth.

QO! The Progreffion muft be either in the contrary or oblique motion.

’

33 Difcords ufed by Syncopation are forbid.

We add another Example of a different Subject, where the Rules, given above, are ftrictly.obferved.

Note. according to the Rules above concerning the Ufe of the 6 we muft give place here to an
- Exception, which is, that it may be ufed in Syncopation. See the Ex.1. together with its Tranf-
pofition in the Duodecime below it. Ex. 2.

Having treated of the three different kinds of Double Counterpoint feperately, we will
fubjoyn the following Examples in order to fhew how all thofe different kinds, if joyned together
in 2 and.3 Parts, may produce an agreeable Variety in Harmony. :

of 7
AE A A Ya
lS 0 2 o RE FS
Ce ™

es |
|



=== PAGE 37 ===

an | Gro ©) 2) en Tee
——— ee | ee ee eee
CS oe Se

This great Variety produced from one and the fame Example plainly fhews the Excellency and
Importance in the Ufe of this Counterpoint. Which agreeable Variety is obtained by ufing chiefly -
the Fifth and Eighth, and thofe in the Contrary Motion only; but the Third in the oblique: where-
by the Counterpoint in Octava and Decima may be drawn from that of the Duodecima by means of
fuch diftinct Variations. fee an Example in two Parts in the Eighth above it Ex. 1.
Eighth below it. Ex. 2.

and in the


=== PAGE 38 ===

|_| tel
SOn—rr 11.46md
BE UA Bee
OEE SOE OE

Tf. further you make the firft Treble proceed with the Counter Tenor, and the fecond Treble. with
the Bafs by Tenths, you will have a compleat Quatro in this manner.

a
(0)
il

il
0)
ll

ee oe ed a ho os NR

The Examples above are convincing Proofs of the great Utility of this Counterpoint in Compofi-
tion, by the means of which a Duetto once regularly compofed, may eafily be framed into a Trio
or Quatro. It now follows to fhew in what manner,a CG mpofition where no Syncopation of
Difcords is ufed, may be inverted in the contrary motion. This Inverfion may be practifed in
‘two ditferent ways; in the fimple Contrary Motion. tad: Al Roverfeio. or in the ftrict
Contrary Motion. Ital: Al Coutrario Riverfo.

t


=== PAGE 39 ===

B49

The. Simple ContraryMotion we fpeak of, fignifies fuch a Progreffion gohan by Inverfion
of one Part the rifing notes are changed into falling ones in the other Part without obferving the fame
Species of whole or half notes. fee Ex.1. But in the Strict Contrary Motion the notes are

\ . . . .
inverted in fuch a manner as that Mi always muft come to be placed againft Fa, i.e. the fame who'c

or half notes are to be imitated. Ex. 2.

The following Scale will fhew the Intervals ufed in the {trict Inverfion in the Contrary Motion.
x. Afcending Scale of the Eighth
; inthe Sharp Key -"- C. D. E. F. G. A. B. C.
_Defcending Scale of the Third. . E. D. C. B. A. G. F. E.
If now for Inftance one Part was to begin with G.or F. then it will be anfwered in the {trict
Anverfion. of the Contrary Motion by A. or G. :
Q ip Flac Keys by placing the
afcending Octave A. B. C. D. E. FG. A.
againft ;
The defcending Scale of the leffer 7a" Gaies, De Cl <Byr & iG.
If therefore one Part was to begin in E.or C. then the other maft follow or anfwer by C.or E.
The fame.Rule holds with refpect to the other Keys
In order to render this manner of Inverfion more intelligible it will farther.be explained by an

Example in three Parts, the fame that has been ufed before already.

Though any Compofition may be inverted in this manner yet as according to the different
nature of a Subject all Inverfions might not produce the fame good Melody: fo it will be ne-
ceffary to ufe it with Caution and Judgement, left under pretence of difplaying much Art, the
Compofition might fuffer in point of Melody; which may be faid to be the Cafe in the following

Fugue, which is rather given for an Example of the Counterpoint in Duodecima than for aSpe-

cimen of. agreeable Melody. fee next Page.


=== PAGE 40 ===

ar re
_ a (ee OM:
A A RE a P| eR

ee a |
i ar hi os
| ——-L Lh sae

en eS eo ee eo
ee Hs - a a ere econ tant ee

Be Se

From what has been faid of this Counterpoint it is evident that it is impoffible to introduce
feveral Subjects in Compofition without the fundamental Knowledge and Practice thereof..and with- |

out a Variety of Subjects a Compofition, efpecially in Church Style,is rather infignificant and

fuperficial. Now it follows to fhew the. manner of Compofing a Fugue upon a CantoFermo ,

and how it is to be carried on.


=== PAGE 41 ===

41)

|e)
o_O om. a ee 7 aa OS net all 3
H coca Pict y =i oth 14 soe

eee on a a

‘Note. Before we write down the Subject that is to be united with the Canto fermo it will be necef-
fary firft to confider duly every Bar of the Canto fermo, whether fuch a Subject introduced ei-
ther in the fimple or ftrict Contrary Motion will harmonize with it at every Bar: or at leaft at
moft of them. The Rules of Counterpoint and good Melody are alfo to be obferved in this
ref{pect. ' Yet there is {till another way of choofing a Subject which may be taken from

the Canto fermo itfelf, by altering the Value of Notes as will appear in the following
Example.



=== PAGE 42 ===

42

Subjects in the Chromatic Stile are inverted differently. For if we were to regulate
the Inverfion of the following Subject in Ex. 1. according to the Rules of the Diatonic Genus
it would ‘appear as in the manner following. fee Ex. 2. But as this Inverfion would be con-
trary to the Key, fo for that reafon it is to be regulated thus: fee Ex.3. as both the Begin-
ning and End remain within the Limits of the Key. o

lee
a
See aH

_ The following Fugue compofed efter this method of Inverfien will fufticiently illuftrate it.

: A Chromatic: Fugue

in the contrary INVERSION.

OO
lente Ged ne DOF are om—mems

If a Compofition is to be embellifhed with more Subjects, fo that each may be different from the

other as to their nature and value of notes, it may be effected by means of the Double Counter -

point as may be {cen in the following Example. \


=== PAGE 43 ===

, Ca

A a NS
nie |
Ee

This. is the way a Fugue with 3 Subjects is to be regulated. Here the fecond Subject is grounded upon

the Counterpoint in the 8th and the Third upon that inthe Twelfth. In the firft place it is to be obferved that
each Subject muft be diftinguifhed from the other by a different value of notes, in order to render their
different movements the more perf{picuous: fecondly, Care muft be taken that after the Subject has been
introduced in the Duodecime, no Six may appear between the Parts as otherwife the Inverfion could have
no place, thirdly, the reafon why the whole Subject has not always been carried on throughout.the Fugue
is partly for fake of bringing in another Subject, or for fake of Melody. Yet a Compofition of 3 Subjects
properly requires a oth part for its Accompanyment, as by that means more Variety could be obtained by

giving futficient room for fome parts to proceed, whilft the othcr refts.


=== PAGE 44 ===

Y MI UMMOIL and relicupua iow mM . beles.

This Part of Variation to be treated of differs trom the common, where the neoter proceed by
Thirds .as in the Ex.1. Rut this Variation, otherwife called Diminution is ufed in notes that pro-
ceed by Skips, Ex. 2. 3. 4. which laft, Example fhews the Me aon to deviate from the common
Rules of Counterpoint, as in this Cafe we proceed from a Concord to aDifcord or from Difcord to

Difcord by Skips, which in Counterpoint is not allowed of, but only in common Compotition. fee
more Examples of fuch Variations, where you will find

firft, the notes in their original Form,
and the Variation placed next to them Ex. 5. 6.7. 8.9.10.

N3’_ The Compofer need not to ufe thofe Embellifhments too profufely, as the Performers generally
are apt enough to introduce them plentifully, though alas! often very unfeafonably. :

Anticip ation arifes when half of the Value is taken from the preceeding note and appro-

priated to the fucceeding note. fee Ex. 1.2. 3. This manner of varying notes is much in

Vogue in our modern Mufick and is ufed with good effect

Yea many Irregularities may be
amended by it.



=== PAGE 45 ===

j 45
Uf SOME: fevtiular Hdl ects
and concerning the Regulation of the Anfwer

The following are the general Rules concerning the Anfwer.

1® the Melody of the Anfwer muft exactly correfpond with that of the Guide.
Q4 4 true Modulation or an exact Conformity to the Key muft be obferved..
3! The Key note and Fifth muft anfwer one another on the firft and laft note of the

F Guide and Anfwer.
4, In a Skip, whether it be at the Beginning or in the Middle, the Key note and Fifth

.

5

muft anfwer one another. .
In the following Example 1. The Anfwer may be framed in two different ways. firft,by making
the laft note conformable with the Key. fee Ex.2. | fecondly, by following the Rules of Solfaing,

or making the Melody more fimilar to that of the Guide. fee Ex.3.

Both Anfwers in fome refpect are right, But the laft Ex. 8. feems to be preferable for two reafons

firft, for being more melodious. fecond, for being more fimilar to the melody of the Guide... From

hence it_may be concluded, that Melody is more to be regarded than the Key.

The fame Obfervation is to be applied to the following Example, for if the Skip A. D.was to be
imitated by D. A. according to Rule, it would be contrary to Modulation and Melody: as in the
firft Cafe either a Semitone D. ¥E. in imitation of A.bB.in the Guide would have preceeded as

in Ex. @. or in the fecond Cafe the Skip would be preceeded by the 31 Dp. R Ex. 6.

The following Ex. will fhew how the Anfwer to one and the fame Subject may be differently

regulated according ‘to the nature of the Key, wherein the Subject is to modulate. In which

refpect both Imitations are proper.



=== PAGE 46 ===

The following Subject Ex.1. may likewife differently be imitated, firft,by following the Rules
of the Key, and fecondly, the Rules of Melody. Inthe firft Cafe the Subject in the Chromatic Stile
muft be reduced to the Diatonic Ex.2. The Anfwer to whichis eafily framed to it Ex.3. This

done, the Imitation only need to be made in the Chromatic Stile. Ex. 4.

ye rt ms
QL a ee
Thy eae

Here the Subject could not be anfwered by the fame Succeffion of Semitones, as in that Cafe we
fhould have made ufe of a note that would have been foreign to the Key, as in Ex.1. the Cafe would.
have been different in a Subject of fuch a nature as in Ex. 2. For here the Imitation is entirely con- \
formable both to the Rules of Modulation and Melody. Obferve alfo in the fame Example that for fake
of a brifker motion, the firft note in the Guide, a Minum, is anfwered by a Crotchet.

Anfwer

In the fecond Cafe by following the Rules of Solfaing the Anfwer muft be regulated as in Ex. 1.
whereby the Subject is more clofely imitated, i.e. by the fame fucceffion of half Tonés. In the 24 Ex. which
by Inverfion becomes fimilar to the foregoing the Imitation is {trictly regulated after the Rules both of
the Key and Melody.

Before we conclude, it will not be improper to fhew in what part of the different Meafures. of
Time, Syncopation of Difcords may be ufed. ;
If In Common Time or Binary Meafure,on the firft or accented part only. fee Ex.1. b y
O48 In quick Meafure or Prefto, where a Bas is divided into 4 Crotchets, on the firft and Third only. Ex.2.
4 Tn flow Meafure or Adagio, on every Crotchet. fee Ex,3, ©

We add by way of Supplement a Specimen of Compofition in the Church Stile or as itis.

properly called in the Stile a Capella from its being performed onty’by Vocal Parts.
Sce next Page

Py


=== PAGE 47 ===

Ky -ri-e ELlei_ —~ -/fon Ky|- aie El tei_fon

-S—— es nl ae
SES ce oe Va
BMG VIMeOntIO=c jd EG i 2 Po aT Be
poo eee eset ao -

Sarl Cl Ono aa ener a

z Te ao a a AN
7 A 9 I Sr Ot teteste oo a re = anie==em a
Key ral

il a \e) a
ny ee A TT
Sats a a on lowe el © ee ee ye ee ee : =
rs | Se ro EX 2 | a oI

Ky. rite E-leid - — —fon Ky - ri+

C

La He oes HO SE See aS |) eee rs |) ee eee ey CO 2 Sa A Be

1-0 oand © a C-e—-— |e oe fe [Ta A Sta Ss SS SS = SS sien

CL ie ES SoC i oD 4D Sse BO We, BO Ge aes holie P= be DAE PB bees 6 Pe ee
a a La A a SS Sn Re A BE BA

= ee EMei ionpky> erie ich iuses uae ce E! lei_fonKy--rie E-_jleifon Ky- Brine) Le

a ET LG fT ~—-S— | a ee
— eel @ a ee es | Beanie i ye ee ey 6 ee Oe 0 ee eee 1 ee ee
Ses a a |) | | Pet Ot Ot oe HO

em eee LS 2 8 OS A BS SS SR — 8 0 <> SESE — A SN © SASS EER

-~e Elei- , - - - fon Ky ri.e E_lei-fon E~ lei-fon Ky-ri-e E~ lei~_ fon Ky.-rie E.

os eS Se a EE ee eee ——-—- |
ens he mE ar-ae je ee
LSS a 2 a es -Oatot Oa 9
(| EE anne SE ee ee ee a

|
I

~e E_lei{fon Ky_rij e E-leiJfon Ky- rie i fon.

i

1 el © wh Be OnE EE LE ll; ee ene eee
11 aS ie ee Ol el a ee Ol ee 0 > 2 eee 2 © ee 2 © ee ee eee |
my

a

il
(0)
ll

CS SS LS eS ee £2 2 ee 2 ed ee eee ee
RO LS Dee Se eee 0 en Be See ee

-e Eleifon Kyrie Eilei.- — fon Ky-rije E-leit ~ - fon

—— Y—~———-]
~lei_fon Ky. -rie E+ lei_fon Et lei-fon, Ky- -rie ELlei- - -fon.

eS

a OS SS MS OO

f

-lei - fon Ky-ri-e Eleifon Ky-ri-e E-Jeifon E-lei- - ~ ~~ ~ fon.


=== PAGE 48 ===

4S -
Tutti un BoM Allegro

veeeaeaaeis SS SSS

OBESE lf Ai GS_nn e 1 aj
A 4  --
ne awe = SESIEE-
ee ee

Sond = BIG) Bic
i ret
VAG Din 220" BD Bt 1 ae
RAR —_ SS So a 2
- fon E_leilfon Ky— tie E_lei — ion E lei - es

[wom ai A PT OA 7A Oe A i ee

(Pi Li Pl AL AvaAwE ise u

A: Sl oe ae a a 7 = i *
a Ky. -rie EJleifon E - lei —|fon Ky-|. rie E_le — 1 -jfon 17

EE - Se ee ff Pee sie
me 0 ee ea ay ——S—- a RR

an ll
ns ee rs ee

87 $65 66 6 bet $6566 #66

Moa oe ae
eS = = ee eee a
in

ee ee ee |
—— ae | ee os oS
BeSE se 4S EL a A AES RG 7 LD CS [DR 7

2 es ee
ae ee

=
he ef ef eee
rete = am =

1a SSS aa == (—en— io =
Ag SSS ee
eal Yt tel |

Za - —
|—_ Pp — oe SS SS — a A A TAA
2 fi_9. | |_| i —————— fg AT
a +d —_ Ch A i a TO a a a Ce.
— es ee ee ee ee ee (he a] ee NT

|

2D SS OS LS A NT OO

Lf Ff o_o —_——

il
(0)
ll

1 ~ pe £ Llei_ fon E- vaeoes . fon
?—=6-——_f
=|]

“
|
i
1
1
1
o
5

Se ee
e E~ -le- ~-i-jfon E- -lei_|- fon
el i
| SS eee
cre SS | =
a 2 ben ee" x |
ae ES
ee _ o> a
6 7 6 4 6 iS 4 3 6-56 — RY
e & 56 4- 8


=== PAGE 49 ===

49
Tutti Prefto moderato

=
gg Oi

Awl- - -menjA- -

nt.

DQ os
++ oa 010 he ee Oe ee
tt a
See j TT SSS SS
= 7
oe Sree ea ea = 7 . fp aaa
cin

Ee, eee

rete tore 1
Oe ae



=== PAGE 50 ===



=== PAGE 51 ===



=== PAGE 52 ===

