

=== PAGE 1 ===

Compositional Theory
in the
Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 2 ===

BLANK PAGE


=== PAGE 3 ===

Compositional Theory
in the
Eighteenth Century

CE OK SP

JOEL LESTER

HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England



=== PAGE 4 ===

Copyright © 1992 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
Third printing, 1996

Publication of this volume has been assisted by a grant from the
Publications Program of the National Endowment for the Humanities,
an independent federal agency.

First Harvard University Press paperback edition, 1994

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Lester, Joel.
Compositional theory in the eighteenth century / Joel Lester.
ro. co
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-674-15522-X (alk. paper) (cloth)
ISBN 0-674-15523-8 (pbk.)
1. Music—Theory—History—1 8th century. 2. Composition (Music)—
History—18th century. I. Title.
ML430.L46 1992
781.3'09'033—dc20

92-5083
cIP_ MN


=== PAGE 5 ===

Acknowledgments

A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY Such as this work is possible only because
of innumerable earlier studies, for which I am unremittingly grateful. I
have been researching this material in various forms for two decades. As
a result, it is more than likely that ideas I have incorporated into my own
thinking may have come from an article or dissertation I read years ago.
In addition, I have frequently drafted a passage only to find its tenets in
a subsequent publication. I have tried wherever possible to cite sources,
especially where a reader may profit from a more detailed discussion of
an individual topic than space allows here. I apologize in advance for any
unintended omissions. The Bibliography, extensive as it is, is intended not
as a comprehensive survey of the primary or secondary literature but as a
list of those items referred to in the text.

I also owe heartfelt thanks to a number of individuals: to Margaretta
Fulton, Humanities Editor at Harvard University Press, who proposed that
I write this book and who has been supportive and knowledgeable at
every step; to Donna Bouvier, who steered this book through production;
to David Lewin, who made uncommonly keen suggestions on an earlier
draft; to Thomas Christensen, who has been an inexhaustible source of
information on eighteenth-century theory; to Frank Samarotto, for his
handsome musical orthography; to Don Franklin, for providing facsimiles
of a Bach manuscript; to David Kornacker, for assistance with the trans-
lations from French; to Rebecca Pechefsky, for assistance in editing; to
students in my history-of-theory seminars at The Graduate School of The
City University of New York, whose questions stimulated my thinking;
and, most of all, to my family, who patiently allowed me to work and
who listened to and commented on numerous passages. An award from
the Research Foundation of CUNY provided for the purchase of research
materials. And an Eisner Research Award from the Humanities Division
at The City College released me from some duties, allowing me to begin
work. Last, without the collection of the Music Research Division at the
New York Public Library at Lincoln Center and the assistance of the
librarians there I would hardly have dared to undertake this work.


=== PAGE 6 ===

BLANK PAGE


=== PAGE 7 ===

on DAMN kk WwW

\o

10.

Il.

Contents

Introduction

. Zarlino and His Legacy

. Species Counterpoint and Fux’s Gradus
. Thoroughbass Methods

. Rameau’s Early Works

. Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

Mattheson and the Study of Melody

. Harmonic Perspectives on Counterpoint
. Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory
. The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes

Riepel on Melody and Phrases

Koch: Toward a Comprehensive Approach
to Musical Structure

Epilogue

Appendix 1 Rameau, Nouveau systéme de

musique theorique (1726): Chapter 23,

“Examples of Errors Found in the Figures of

Corelli’s op. 5”

Appendix 2 Concerning the Authenticity
of Thoroughbass Methods Attributed
to Albrechtsberger

Bibliography

Index

26
49
(To)
127
158
175
193
231

258

273

300

305

320
323
349


=== PAGE 8 ===

BLANK PAGE


=== PAGE 9 ===

We have the good fortune to live in a century in which most sciences
and arts have risen to such a high degree of perfection.
Preface by Johann Ernst Bach to
Anleitung zu der musikalischen Gelabrtheit
(1758) by Jacob Adlung

There are two opposing dangers to be avoided when proposing a system
of harmony: one is to censure those things that are constantly and suc-
cessfully used in any number of ways; the other to extend rules to cases

that cannot be used, or that can be used only with special precautions.

Alexandre-Théophile Vandermonde,

Second Mémoire sur un nouveau systéme

d’harmonie applicable a l'état de la musique

(1778), p. 2


=== PAGE 10 ===

BLANK PAGE


=== PAGE 11 ===

Introduction

The picture any age forms of a section of the past is never totally inde-
pendent of the controversies of its own time, in which it seeks to ascer-
tain the nature of its own historical essence. There is a danger that
(since every historian is also a child of his own time) historical judge-
ments will be based indiscriminately and uncritically on the norms we
all (necessarily) use to orientate ourselves in our own time. The best way
to avoid or at least reduce the danger is to recognize it and thus seek to
neutralize it, instead of allowing it to seep into the investigation of a
past epoch in the form of implicit assumptions.

Dahlhaus 1985, p. 2

MANY INTRODUCTIONS begin by explaining the need for yet another
book on the topic at hand. Such comments are not pertinent here. No
other comprehensive history details what eighteenth-century writers on
compositional theory said, when and how they said it, and what they
meant in the context of their own times.

Such a study was less urgent prior to recent years. But the increasingly
prevalent belief that analysis of and scholarship on the music of past ages
should at least acknowledge the thinking of those ages has made a com-
prehensive and critical survey of that theory a pressing concern. Unless
theory of a former age is understood in its own context, its issues are
eviscerated and its theorists turned into shades merely foreshadowing
modern theoretical positions or cardboard figures standing in for modern
theoretical disputes.

By being aware of its context, we can become aware of the resplendence
of eighteenth-century theory. This was the era in which many features of
modern theory first emerged and in which theorists first began grappling
in modern terms with issues that remain challenging today—the nature of
the interaction between lines and harmonies, the nature of the interaction
between melodic motives and phrasing and harmonies, the factors that


=== PAGE 12 ===

make music mobile and the best ways to understand them, the relation
between point-to-point connections and larger structures, and the presence
of structural foundations lying below the compositional surface.

It is central to this study that the first priority of a historian of ideas is
to understand how the original authors thought. Writers of past eras,
when formulating their thoughts in ways that seem problematic to modern
readers, were not trying to state our modern ideas in clumsy fashion; they
were stating their own ideas in their own terms. Only by being sensitive
to their terminology, to their perspectives, and to their theoretical agendas
can we avoid unwittingly misinterpreting the import of their ideas. A full
exploration of terminology, perspectives, and agendas is the subject matter
of this study as a whole. But one instance of each can foreshadow the
issues involved.

Modulation is a term that has lost a once-common meaning. Nowadays
it denotes a change of key or the process of key change. In the eighteenth
century (and well into the nineteenth), it also commonly denoted what
seems to us the contradictory meaning of reinforcing a sense of the current
key. An eighteenth-century musician understood an underlying unity en-
compassing modulating within a key and modulating from one key to
another—a family of ideas including the notions of a melody or progres-
sion that has a sense of direction (establishing one key or moving to
another), a melody in general, a chord progression or voice leading in
general, the substance from which a melody or a chord is made, and so
forth. Thus Johann Gottfried Walther, when he talks about why a proper
scale has a mixture of whole steps and half steps, says if there were no
half steps, the resulting whole-tone scale would be a “modulation without
modulation . . . a pure mishmash” in the sense of a melodic structure
without structure (Walther 1732, article modus musicus; Lester 1989,
p. 212): neither “modulation” here denotes change of key.

No single modern term encompasses what we regard as these separate
meanings. Yet if we are to understand eighteenth-century musicians, we
must try to grasp the family resemblance recognized by them among what
we regard as separate tenets. Construing a term solely in its modern sense
or transferring only a part of its meaning to a single modern term inevitably
distorts the meaning of the original. In this study, discussions of individual
theorists adhere wherever possible to the terminology of the original
source. When modulation or a similar term occurs in a citation, it is
generally rendered by a modern equivalent along with the original term.
The original meaning emerges by trying to think in terms of the original
vocabulary, not merely by trying to find a modern term that perhaps is
relatively close to that original term but invariably carries some unwar-
ranted connotations and excludes others.

Likewise, complexes of ideas often carried different connotations in the

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 13 ===

eighteenth century than they do nowadays. For instance, after the middle
of the eighteenth century, the intervals in species counterpoint were under-
stood as parts of chords and chord progressions by many musicians,
Mozart and Beethoven among them, not as purely intervallic voice leading.
But this does not necessarily mean that they were thinking along the lines
of a late-nineteenth-century harmony text, placing chord numbers willy-
nilly beneath the exercise and thinking of each verticality outside its linear
context. Counterpoint represented to them the interaction of lines, even
though they thought of the intervals between those lines as complete or
incomplete statements of chords.

Finally, a theorist may have introduced an explanation to resolve a
problem hardly remembered by modern musicians. Consider the issue of
suspensions. Nowadays, we easily parse the surface of a piece into triads
and seventh chords and sort out nonharmonic suspensions. It is hard for
us to imagine the music world before triads, seventh chords, and their
inversions were recognized as the standard harmonies and other tones
conceived of as additions to them. But that was the situation confronting
early-eighteenth-century musicians. Innumerable rules and exceptions
dealt with the treatment of dozens of verticalities containing suspended
notes—some indicated by different thoroughbass figurings and some shar-
ing the same thoroughbass figurings in any of a large number of idiosyn-
cratic systems of thoroughbass numbering; some resolving down and some
resolving up; some forming what we consider seventh chords and therefore
not resolving until several other voices also moved, and others resolving
without other voices moving; and some even being consonances over the
bass though they nevertheless had to resolve as suspensions (such as the
fifth in a 6/5 chord).

To simplify this situation Rameau developed his theory of chords by
subposition (ninth and eleventh chords), explaining how the resolution of
virtually all suspended dissonances could be understood by a single rule.
From an early-eighteenth-century perspective, he was trying to rationalize
suspended dissonances and give a linear context to verticalities that thor-
oughbass theory simply considered entities capable of being juxtaposed
with numerous other entities. It is easy for a modern musician to see only
the resulting ninth and eleventh chords reminiscent of the absurdly stacked
thirds of later harmonic theory and wonder what a theory with ninth and
eleventh chords has to do with early-eighteenth-century music. Only by
understanding the situation that motivated Rameau’s theoretical formu-
lation can we understand his constructs.

To be sure, terms, ideas, and slogans do change. And an important part
of their meaning today is what those changes inspired. Perhaps an eigh-
teenth-century political slogan can demonstrate this point more dramati-
cally than a musical term. “All men are created equal” has resounded

Introduction


=== PAGE 14 ===

through the last two centuries. But it has clearly meant different things to
different people at different times. Many Americans in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, possibly including the author of the phrase, saw little
conflict between espousing the slogan and owning slaves, excluding women
and those who did not own property from full citizenship rights, and so
forth.

Jefferson’s words, taken in their own eighteenth-century context, reflect
an attitude that we today may regard as internally inconsistent. But those
words also helped people become aware of inequalities (a role the slogan
still plays) and thereby inspired and continue to inspire them to change
their practices and attitudes so as to conform more closely to the slogan.
The same is true of musical theoretical terms, ideas, and slogans.

Ideas may well have lives quite independent of their original context,
but it is ultimately misleading to take an idea as it has developed in a later
era and apply that formulation to the original context. It often distorts
the original idea to such an extent that it seems no reasonable person
could have thought that way.

Any study will necessarily view the past through the agenda of its
present. Historians address only issues that they conceive of as issues. Thus
Hugo Riemann acknowledges in the preface to his impressive Geschichte
der Musiktheorie im IX.—XIX. Jahrhundert (1898), the closest approxi-
mation to a comprehensive history of theory, that he intended not a
comprehensive, objective history, but a chronicle tracing theoretical tenets
from their genesis to their place in his own theory of harmony. Likewise,
Matthew Shirlaw’s perceptive Theory of Harmony (1917) concentrates on
speculative harmonic theory, primarily by those who treat “The Natural
Principles of Harmony” (subtitle), excluding important writers, ignoring
crucial theoretical traditions (counterpoint and the study of melody), and
largely bypassing practical aspects of theory and the practical applications
of speculative tenets.

Many studies of eighteenth-century theory address issues from the per-
spective of functional harmony and overlook many discussions of voice
leading and hierarchical structure to which a Schenkerian perspective
awakens us. To take a glaring example, Riemann’s and Shirlaw’s studies,
different as they are, dismiss or ignore species counterpoint as a force in
eighteenth-century musical thinking. The linear concerns of the eighteenth
century were simply not as important in Riemann’s and Shirlaw’s time as
they have become since. Some modern European scholars of eighteenth-
century theory—Peter Benary, Arnold Feil, and Carl Dahlhaus among
them—have also been less concerned with the implications of many linear
and hierarchical ideas in eighteenth-century theory than some American
scholars are. It is inevitable that the present study, which does address

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 15 ===

these issues, will fail to address other concerns of interest in the present
or in the future.

In short, objectivity is an elusive goal in history. Indeed, it has become
fashionable in some disciplines to deny altogether that objectivity is a
proper goal of historical research. But as stated in the epigraph at the
head of this Introduction, awareness of one’s biases can help one avoid
potential pitfalls.

Surveying the writings of approximately a century of musicians and
comparing all these works has inevitably brought new items to light. For
instance, it is now clear that numerals placed next to the chords in an
example to analyze the root movements first appeared in print earlier than
has hitherto been believed: in 1766 in a book published by John Trydell
in Dublin and then widely propagated via its inclusion in the 1771 En-
cyclopaedia Britannica. Of greater significance than such facts is the extent
to which it is now evident that many tenets or discoveries long associated
with a single theorist actually appeared widely in print much earlier. For
instance, many ideas central to Rameau’s theory—not only triadic inver-
sions and the notion of a chordal root, but also directed motion as evaded
cadences, the association of specific chord types with specific scale degrees,
and so forth—appeared in many earlier works.

These and other findings have led to the discovery of a larger degree of
agreement than has previously been thought to exist among different
eighteenth-century schools of thought. Despite numerous and acrimonious
theoretical disputes, representatives of various theoretical traditions such
as species counterpoint, thoroughbass, and harmony shared many more
underlying tenets than has been recognized, especially in terms of practical
applications.

This study deals intensively with the period from the 1720s through
about 1790, that is, from three treatises considered classics in their theo-
retical traditions—Rameau’s 1722 treatise on harmony, composition, and
accompaniment; Fux’s 1725 manual on counterpoint, fugue, and com-
position; and Heinichen’s 1728 manual on thoroughbass and composi-
tion—through the Versuch einer Anleitung zur Composition by Koch
(1782-1793). To cover the background of the earlier works, the historical
survey begins with Zarlino, the great theorist of the second half of the
sixteenth century, whose works remained influential into the eighteenth
century.

The emphasis is on compositional theory to the extent that it can be
separated from speculative theory, aesthetics, or performance theory. Issues
of speculative theory (the origins of notes, intervals, chords; representa-
tions of the divine in music; and so forth) and aesthetics are discussed
only where necessary to understand the practical application of a writer’s

Introduction


=== PAGE 16 ===

ideas or the climate in which a theorist worked. Sources whose primary
focus is performance, especially thoroughbass manuals, are invoked as
they illuminate composition. Even publications intended for amateurs can
shed light on the spread of ideas within the music world. This information
is central to the vision of history of theory in the present study. It is one
thing to present what Rameau, for instance, articulated in his works. It is
quite another to see how those ideas affected the music primers of the
time. Although some of Rameau’s ideas were avidly debated over the
decades but never left the hothouse of speculative treatises and their
rebuttals, other ideas quickly joined everyday musical discourse.

Composition is construed here rather broadly to include everything from
musical rudiments, intervals and chords, the study of harmony and voice
leading, considerations of melody, musical phrasing and form, and the
actual process of working out a composition. The relationship between
music and text (including most aspects of text setting) is considered an
aspect of musical aesthetics and is therefore bypassed. To have included
it would have expanded an already large study.

Finally, this work should be regarded as a preliminary sketch of a history
of eighteenth-century theory. The field is vast and, despite many strides
taken in the past few decades, still contains numerous large patches that
mapmakers of old labeled terra incognita. My aim is to present a com-
prehensive view of the century, fill in many gaps, correct misconceptions,
and make it easier for future scholars to orient themselves within the field.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 17 ===

CHAPTER ONE

BAO

Zarlino and His Legacy

Zarlino: A celebrated writer on music whom M. de Brossard calls “the

prince of modern musicians.”
Rameau 1722, Table of Terms

THE OPENING DECADES of the eighteenth century present a plethora
of seemingly disparate theoretical approaches to the materials of musical
composition. There were methods of traditional counterpoint (intervals
and their interactions), a method of species counterpoint, methods of
thoroughbass, and studies of harmony. These works, as well as dictionaries
and journals, described several approaches to melodic construction, phras-
ing, and those aspects of music that nowadays fall under the heading of
form: rhetoric underlay discussions of cadences, of dissonant configura-
tions, of the parsing of pieces, and of melodic construction in general;
variations applied to thoroughbass voice leadings created all sorts of com-
positions; and there were discussions of imitation, canon, and fugue,
descriptions of the events within various types of movements, and ad hoc
discussions of melodic contour and rhythmic continuity. Several different
systems of modes and various formulations of the major-minor keys co-
existed, While some writers continued to invoke numerical ratios to ex-
plain the basics of music, others appealed to the new science of acoustics,
and still others specified no particular model to account for the musical
elements. If this were not sufficient diversity, every new work seemed to
present its own idiosyncratic mixture of these elements.

Despite this wide range of content, approach, purview, and conceptual
model, most of these traditions can be traced to common roots in mid-
sixteenth-century theory and in the profound changes in musical style that
took place at the end of that century. Both species counterpoint as offered
by Johann Joseph Fux (1660-1741) and the harmonic theories of Jean-


=== PAGE 18 ===

Philippe Rameau (1683-1764) are deeply indebted to the great sixteenth-
century theorist Gioseffo Zarlino (1517-1590). The controversies over
musical style that split the world of composition into prima pratica and
seconda pratica (controversies in which Zarlino was an early participant)
were crucial to the rise of thoroughbass, the evolution of major and minor
keys, the continued existence of contrapuntal theory alongside growing
harmonic perspectives, and also the use of rhetoric to explain the ordering
and content of musical compositions. As a result, although Zarlino is far
removed from the eighteenth century chronologically and conceptually, it
is appropriate to begin a study of eighteenth-century theory with his ideas
as they appeared in the mid-sixteenth century. This discussion concentrates
solely on those aspects of Zarlino’s ideas that are important to an under-
standing of eighteenth-century theory.

Zarlino as Theorist

Among the many excellent sixteenth-century writers on music, Zarlino
alone was preeminently influential on later theorists in numerous countries.
His formulations, transmitted via his own magnum opus, the Istitutioni
harmoniche of 1558, via manuscript translations, and via the writing of
his pupils and others influenced by him, were authoritative for musicians
in Italy, France, Germany, and England by the early seventeenth century.
More than 160 years after its publication, ideas from the Istitutioni per-
meate early-eighteenth-century writings in several different theoretical tra-
ditions. And as late as the end of the nineteenth century, Hugo Riemann
cited Zarlino as a source of parts of his harmonic theories (even though
Riemann misconstrued the role of these tenets in Zarlino’s work).
Zarlino’s authority and influence derive from his erudition as well as
his practical knowledge. He was a composer as well as a scholar—a student
of Adrian Willaert (c. 1490-1562) and maestro di cappella at Saint Mark’s
in Venice from 1565 until his death in 1590, succeeding in that post
Willaert, who held it from 1527 to 1562, and fellow Willaert pupil Cip-
riano de Rore (1516-1565). Later musicians found Zarlino’s writings
stimulating because he was primarily concerned with human music (musica
humana); hearing and the practices of composers were both central issues
and also important criteria in deciding theoretical matters. But Zarlino’s
humanism, which also encompasses the first detailed discussion of text
setting, did not endorse all compositional practices. Music did not exist
for him solely to titillate the listener. Along with Plato, Zarlino believed
that music should be enjoyed prudently because it has the capacity to
arouse evil as well as good (Zarlino 1558, Part 1, Chapter 3; Plato’s
Republic in Strunk 1950, pp. 7-8). He repeatedly insisted that music should
contain pleasing sounds combined with skill, and he rejected what he

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 19 ===

major tone soe |
| seven
(9:8) c pee gw. (16:9)
(6:5) aah ratios: (16:9) (5:3) 2:1)
6:3)
xr :
— =
A —y octave eo
‘“). e1 I @ay ce
Tatios: (9:8) (6:5) (hl)

Example 1-1.

deemed excessive and improper dissonances, improper melodic intervals,
and undue chromaticism. It is therefore not surprising that the most
prominent musician to challenge these apparent extravagances in mono-
dies early in the next century was Zarlino’s pupil Giovanni Maria Artusi
(c. 1540-1613).

Platonic-Pythagorean numerology provided a systematic basis for Zar-
lino’s conception of proper and improper usages. The ancient Greeks had
realized that in music there was a direct correlation between low-numbered
string ratios and the simplest musical intervals (1:1 for the unison, 2:1 for
the octave, 3:2 for the fifth, and so forth). This placed music in striking
contrast to other quantifiable domains, where everyday relationships were
often represented by quite complex numbers. In geometry, for instance,
the radius and diameter of a circle relate to the circumference and area
via the irrational pi, and the hypotenuse of a right triangle is the square
root of the sum of the other sides, generally an irrational number. From
antiquity through the beginning of the modern era, the ratios of musical
intervals, where there was.a one-to-one relationship between simple struc-
tures and simple proportions, were invoked in cosmology and other sci-
ences, as well as in theories to explain musical structure. Intervals repre-
sented by simple ratios were the most consonant. And the progression
from relatively complex ratios through simpler ratios to ratios close to
unity explained the functional progression from a suspended dissonance
to a third or sixth to the perfection of a cadential unison or octave (see
Example 1-1). The directionality of such cadential voice leadings in both
musical terms and also mathematical terms (as the ratios progress toward
unity) provided the basis for a rudimentary functional theory of intervallic-
harmonic progression.

Humanistic concerns and Platonic-Pythagorean reasoning coexist but
do not always agree as the conceptual underpinnings of Zarlino’s theo-
retical perspective. Like all theorists who have sought to explain music via
a systematic theory, Zarlino had to strike a balance between music in a
particular style created by and heard by humans and music as a construc-
tion based on abstract and eternal principles. For instance, since Zarlino

Zarlino and His Legacy


=== PAGE 20 ===

10

Example 1-2.

believed that smaller-number ratios were more consonant than larger-
number ratios, the inexorable logic of numbers led him to argue that what
we call a major 6/4 chord (represented by the proportion 5:4:3) is more
consonant than what we call a minor 6/3 chord (8:6:5) (Zarlino 1558,
Part 3, Chapter 60); see Example 1-2. Zarlino’s argument is not entirely
irrelevant to sixteenth-century practices, since there are occasional “major
6/4 chords” in his own compositions and those of his contemporaries in
which the dissonant fourth is treated more leniently than it is in other
combinations.! Yet Zarlino readily acknowledges that the 6/4 chord is
“little esteemed by musicians,” and elsewhere he does not insist on its use.

Zarlino’s special genius, then, lay in his ability to organize the compre-
hensive practical knowledge of his age according to speculative principles,
and at the same time to look beyond the boundaries of those principles
to acknowledge practical realities, occasionally including novel insights
that challenge the very bases of his theoretical conceptions.

Aspects of Zarlino’s Compositional Theory, Sixteenth-Century
Music, and Later Adaptations

Zarlino’s Istitutioni lays out the compositional practices of the sacred
music of his own time. The style he surveys is not, therefore, that of his
slightly younger contemporary Palestrina (c. 1525-1594), most of whose
compositions postdate the first edition of Istitutioni, but that of his teacher
Willaert (even though on many matters, Zarlino’s explanations do in fact
agree with usages of the Palestrina-Lassus generation). Zarlino frequently
applies a perspective on voice-leading concerns somewhat different from
the one that modern musicians might apply and even different from that
of the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century musicians who cited him as an
authority. Thus, when later theorists borrow or adapt tenets from the
Istitutioni, it is important to recognize the differences between the for-
mulation and placement of the tenet within Zarlino’s own works, the

1. In Zarlino’s madrigal Amor mentre dormia (Zarlino 1562, p. 25, m. 21) and in Part

2 of Palestrina’s Beatus Laurentius (Werke, 5, p. 55), suspended fourths that are part of
“major 6/4” chords last twice as long as other suspensions.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 21 ===

SS ee ee eee

Major thirds Minor thirds Major sixths Minor sixths

Example 1-3. Zarlino 1558, Part 3, Chapter 29

often different formulation of the tenet within the later work, and the
sometimes different formulation of that tenet in modern theory.

Zarlino’s discussion of consecutive consonances is representative. In
addition to the familiar prohibition on parallel octaves and perfect fifths,
he bans two major thirds or two minor sixths in succession and only
barely tolerates consecutive minor thirds or major sixths (Part 3, Chapter
29)—proscriptions that Zarlino may have received from his teacher Wil-
laert (Berger 1987, pp. 111-112).

Zarlino gives three reasons for these proscriptions. First and foremost,
consecutive consonances violate the principle of variety. Promoting variety,
which “brings pleasure and delight” (Part 3, Chapter 55), is a goal of
many of Zarlino’s compositional recommendations. In addition to pro-
scribing consecutive consonances of the same size, Zarlino also bans re-
peated melodic motives (Chapter 55), urges avoiding unisons since they
contain no variety (Chapter 41), and praises the harmonic perfection of
what we call the root-position triad (without using that term)? because it
contains a variety of consonances: the major and minor thirds within a
fifth (Chapter 31).

Because of variety, Zarlino tolerates two minor thirds or two major
sixths in succession only when the parts move by step, because in this case
the interval in each of the two parts differs in the system of just intonation
he proposes: one part moves by a major tone (9:8), while the other moves
by a minor tone (10:9). He prohibits minor thirds or major sixths in
succession when skips are involved.

Zarlino’s second reason for banning parallel consonances is that there
should be a semitone (literally or contained within a skip) somewhere in
any interval-to-interval connection. The lack of a semitone arises when
both parts in an interval succession move by whole tones; see Example
1-3. When thirds or sixths of different qualities follow one another by

2. The term triad (trias harmonica) was coined by Johannes Lippius (1585—1612) in the
seventeenth century. References in modern scholarship to Zarlino’s use of the term are
erroneous.

Zarlino and His Legacy

It


=== PAGE 22 ===

12

2 bg 2 ao 2

Se pee peep ete

Augmented Diminished Diminished Tritones
octave octave fifth

Example 1-4. Zarlino 1558, Part 3, Chapter 30

step or skip, a semitone arises or is passed through somewhere in the voice
leading.

More troubling for Zarlino is his third reason: what he calls the lack
of a harmonic relationship can arise when two thirds or sixths of like
quality follow one another by step or skip, or in other interval successions;
see Example 1-4. The proscriptions of the cross relations and the dimin-
ished fifth are understandable in terms of later theory. But the lack of a
harmonic relationship in some of the other instances highlights voice
interactions on which later theorists do not focus much attention, although
these interactions were clearly of interest to Zarlino as a sixteenth-century
composer and theorist. Zarlino is interested not only in the intervals
formed as simultaneities, but also in the “diagonal” relations among the
four notes involved in any interval succession.

Surprisingly, although Zarlino uses diagonal tritones and diminished
fifths to proscribe various voice leadings among consonances, he uses the
same procedure to insist that a diminished fifth may appear as a vertical
interval, even in two-part note-against-note writing, because when that
interval moves to a major third no false interval occurs diagonally: “the
parts can be exchanged without any discomfort” (see Example 1-5).

oe 1 i °@ ro x a _e-
__@ ., a © e oo o 2

19
\o

Example 1-5. Zarlino 1558, Part 3, Chapter 30

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 23 ===

—_

Example 1-6.

Whatever his reasons, and whatever the relationship of his recommen-
dations to compositional practice in the sixteenth century, Zarlino’s pro-
scription of parallel major thirds and parallel minor sixths was frequently
cited by seventeenth- and eighteenth-century theorists, who then proceeded
to explain that this rule need not be followed. Christoph Schréter (1699—
1782) still mentions this proscription in his 1772 thoroughbass treatise,
and Johann Georg Albrechtsberger (1736-1809) suggests that two major
thirds should not appear in conjunct succession in the strict style (Al-
brechtsberger 1790, Chapter 7).

A further voice-leading recommendation suggested by Zarlino that was
routinely cited and just as routinely dismissed by later theorists concerns
major and minor intervals. Zarlino suggests that the upper note of major
intervals should ascend and the upper note of minor intervals should
descend (Part 2, Chapter 5). Although Zarlino himself pretty much ignores
this advice elsewhere and does not follow it in his own compositions, the
tenet lived on in theory as a troublesome idea for quite a while. Many
seventeenth-century writers respected Zarlino’s authority enough to repeat
the remark, almost always disclaiming its applicability to modern practice.
Rameau was sufficiently intrigued by the notion to apply Zarlino’s advice
to what he regarded as the two dissonances in a dominant seventh chord:
the leading tone, which he called the major dissonance (because it is a
major third over the root), always ascended to resolve, and the chord
seventh, which he called the minor dissonance (a minor seventh over the
root), always descended. The stature of Zarlino 130 years after his death
is nowhere more apparent than in Rameau’s pride in explaining this well-
known remark of Zarlino’s that others had found inexplicable.

Another voice-leading recommendation of Zarlino’s is a legacy of earlier
theory. Amid a wide-ranging discussion of various consonant successions
that are recommended or proscribed, Zarlino urges that when imperfect
consonances move to perfect ones, they should proceed from the one closer
in size: for instance, a third or sixth expanding to an octave should be
major (Part 3, Chapter 38). Only when a diagonal tritone would arise
between parts, as in the motion of a major third to a perfect fifth over a
stepwise descending tenor, does Zarlino make an exception (see Example
1-6).

On another voice-leading matter not much remarked on by future theo-
rists, Zarlino does not allow the resolution of a dissonant suspension to

Zarlino and His Legacy

13


=== PAGE 24 ===

14

| ° fete.)
o—_bo eS bo

7 6 8} “7 6 SI

Example 1-7. Zarlino 1558, Part 3, Chapter 42

co

Example 1-8. Jeppesen 1970, p. 78

be sustained and become a perfect interval (see Example 1-7). Zarlino
explains that here the “dissonance resolves coldly” since the ear is not
adequately compensated for “the offense of the dissonance” (Part 3, Chap-
ter 42).

In addition to restricting voice leadings that did not trouble later theo-
rists, Zarlino also approves of acceptable sixteenth-century voice leadings
that bothered later theorists. For instance, he selectively approves of var-
ious hidden fifths and octaves, even in two-voice writing (Chapter 36),
agreeing with Palestrina’s practice ( Jeppesen 1970, pp. 295-301). Zarlino’s
examples also consistently apply various sixteenth-century melodic and
rhythmic norms, such as the near total absence of ascending skips from
quarter notes on a strong beat (ibid., pp. 61-73),? and the total absence of
the quarter-note figure shown in Example 1-8) (ibid., pp. 78-80):

The concerns outlined here, when compared to seventeenth- and eigh-
teenth-century texts that purport to teach counterpoint in the stile antico,
indicate how different sixteenth-century theory and practice were from
such eighteenth-century theory. In his Gradus ad parnassum (1725), for
instance, which the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries viewed as a manual
in sixteenth-century style, Fux does not mention Zarlino’s ban on parallel
major thirds and minor sixths, he does not mention the need for a semitone
within interval successions, he is not troubled by most of Zarlino’s non-
harmonic relations (except for chromatic cross relations), he prohibits
diminished fifths in note-against-note counterpoint except at cadences in
more than two voices, he does not mention Zarlino’s recommendation to

3. Only two such skips occur in the Istitutioni: in Marco and Palisca 1968, Ex. 87, first
example, m. 12, and Ex. 118d, upper voice in m. 13. In the latter instance, the skip occurs
in a part that has been intervallically inverted to demonstrate a particular type of invertible
counterpoint.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 25 ===

proceed to a perfect interval from the imperfect interval closest in size, he
does not proscribe holding the resolution of a suspension to become a
perfect consonance, he does not allow similar motion into perfect conso-
nances in two voices, and he incorporates many melodic patterns unknown
to the sixteenth century. Similarly, the discussion of strict style in the
Tractatus compositionis augmentatus (c. 1655) by Christoph Bernhard
(1627-1692), even though it was written much closer to the end of the
sixteenth century than Fux’s Gradus, also differs in innumerable matters
from sixteenth-century practice.

Successive Composition, Tenor vs. Bass Primacy, and Chords

Zarlino’s sixteenth-century perspective is once again evident when he
recommends that the voices in a texture be composed successively (Part
3, Chapter 58): “most of the time musicians are accustomed to begin all
their compositions with the tenor and then add to it the soprano, joining
to these the bass and finally the alto.”* Common sense and other sixteenth-
century theorists inform us that the fully imitative textures characteristic
of mid-sixteenth-century music cannot be composed in such a manner.
But Zarlino hews to this traditional approach to composition. One voice,
usually the tenor, which “governs and regulates the composition and
maintains the mode,” is composed first as a subject (soggetto: “that part
against which the composer derives the invention of the other parts,” Part
3, Chapter 26). Even if the composer works out all the parts together, the
part composed first is the soggetto of that passage. Zarlino does not
describe any other method of composing.

For instance, when in Chapter 58 he explains dozens of ways of com-
bining four voices to make a consonant sonority, he begins in each case
with the soprano-tenor dyad and adds all the other possible voice com-
binations (see Table 1).5 The approach to chords in this table differs from
later chordal theory in several ways. The chords are a composite of several
intervals built from the tenor. And there is no differentiation of what later
theory would know as separate inversions or even major and minor chords.
This method of explaining multivoiced chords continued to appear in
treatises even as late as the Historia musica (1695) by Andrea Bontempi

4. Although Zarlino recommends this practice, he does not follow earlier theorists such
as Johannes Tinctoris (1436-1511), who had insisted that the rules of proper voice leading
were more important when against the tenor than between other voices, even allowing
consecutive fifths between outer voices not involving the tenor (Seay 1978, p. 133)!

5. Lester 1989, pp. 18-19, contains the entire table and a translation into musical
notation.

Zarlino and His Legacy

TS


=== PAGE 26 ===

16

Table 1. Chords that are found between the parts of compositions

From the unison:

If the soprano makes a unison with the tenor,

and the bass makes a third below the tenor;

the alto can be a fifth or sixth above the bass.
But if the bass makes a fifth below the tenor,

the alto makes a third or tenth above the bass.
Likewise if the bass be a sixth below the tenor,

the alto can be a third or tenth above the bass.

(Etc.]

Source: Zarlino 1558, Part 3, Chapter 58.

(c. 1624-1705) (pp. 227—228),© long after a theory of triads and their
inversions had been published. And the notion of composing against a
soggetto (Fux’s cantus firmus) remained alive through the eighteenth cen-
tury in both strict and free styles. For instance, the very first rule that
Rameau gives for composing is that “we normally write a single part,
called the subject” (Rameau 1722, Book 3, Chapter 43). Later in the
eighteenth century, both Joseph Riepel (1709-1782) and Heinrich Chris-
toph Koch (1749-1816) imply that a composer in the galant style begins
by writing a main part against which the remainder of the texture is
composed.

Zarlino knows well that the lowest voice, not the tenor, plays a crucial
role in determining the sonority of a harmony: it is the bass (basso) or
lowest voice as well as the basis (basa) or foundation (Part 3, Chapter
58). But his theoretical perspective does not allow him to treat the bass
as a primary determinant of harmony. As just discussed, harmony for him
arises from a variety of intervals against the tenor that join to make a
concordance, not from a harmony built on the lowest pitch.

Nevertheless, Zarlino realized that his tenor-oriented perspective was
inadequate to illuminate important aspects of musical structure. In Chap-
ters 30 and 31, amid a long digression concerning cross relations and
consecutive consonances, he stresses that such nonharmonic relationships
be avoided in two voices. But he realizes that it is virtually impossible to
do so in many-voiced textures because there are so many diagonal voice
interactions in any succession of simultaneities. When more than two

voices are present,

6. Bontempi’s explanation occurs in the section on practica moderna. He credits a 1588
treatise by Zarlino’s pupil Orazio Tigrini (c. 1535-1591) for his table.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 27 ===

the variety of harmony . . . does not consist solely in the variety of the
consonances which are found between two voices, but also in the variety of
the harmonies—which [variety] is determined by the position of the noté
which makes a third or tenth above the lowest voice of the composition.
Either these [intervals] are minor, and the harmony which arises is determined
by or corresponds to the arithmetical proportion or division; or they are
major, and such a harmony is determined by or corresponds to the harmonic
mean. On this variety depends all the diversity and perfection of harmonies.
(Part 3, Chapter 31)

In this famous passage, Zarlino not only acknowledges the primary role
played by minor and major “triads” in “root position,” to use modern
terminology, but he also uses the bass as the voice from which he builds
the chords.”

Zarlino does not and cannot place these structures in positions of prom-
inence in his treatises; they do not appear in chapter headings, and they
are not the basis of compositional instruction. Nor does he relate “inver-
sions of triads” to their “root-position form.” Such recognitions are pred-
icated on the bass as the primary determinant of harmonic structure and
that multipitch sonorities are a unity greater than the sum of the intervals
that constitute them. These are stances incompatible with interval struc-
tures based on the tenor as the basis of composition.

To be sure, Zarlino is aware of the invertibility of all intervals within
an octave (seconds becoming sevenths, thirds becoming sixths, and fifths
becoming fourths). But this notion appears only once in all his voluminous
treatises: amid a long explanation on the consonance of a fourth in the
Dimostrationi harmoniche (1571) (p. 77). He argues by analogy that since
consonant thirds invert to become consonant sixths, and since dissonant
seconds invert to become dissonant sevenths, therefore the perfect fourth,
which is an inversion of the consonant perfect fifth, should be consonant.
Franchino Gafori (1451-1522) had also noted the octave invertibility of
intervals within an octave, mentioning how major thirds become minor
sixths and minor thirds become major sixths (Gafori 1496, Chapter 7).
But for Gafori as well as for Zarlino, a harmonic, bass-oriented perspective
stands outside the overall theoretical framework.

Yet Zarlino’s hesitancy in this matter surfaces once again in Chapter

7. Dahlhaus 1957 interprets this passage somewhat differently, arguing that the term
harmony in this passage refers to the harmoniousness of the proportions; hence Zarlino
still understands the concordance as the result of pairs of intervals and not as a chord in
the modern sense. But even if Zarlino intended by harmony only the harmoniousness of
the proportionality of these concordances, he explicitly refers to the harmoniousness of the
entire sonority as built from the bass, not merely of the constituent intervals. Rivera 1979
and Lester 1989 (pp. 14~15) discuss tentative antecedents of Zarlino’s recognition of these
harmonies.

Zarlino and His Legacy

17


=== PAGE 28 ===

18

59, when he repeats that a multivoice sonority is best when there is a fifth
and third over the lowest voice but that a sixth can replace the fifth over
the lowest voice. Here again, although he bypasses an inversional expla-
nation of what we call first-inversion triads, he explains the concordance
(a chord of the sixth) by the intervals over the bass, not against the tenor.

Zarlino’s tenor-oriented theoretical framework affects even the way the
intervals are derived. Zarlino, like other theorists of his and earlier gen-
erations, generates intervals by dividing them, adding them, or subtracting
them, but not by inverting them: the division of the octave (2:1) yields
the perfect fifth (3:2) and perfect fourth (4:3); the division of the perfect
fifth yields the major and minor thirds (5:4 and 6:5); the division of the
major third yields the major and minor tones (9:8 and 10:9); and the
division of the minor third yields a major tone and a diatonic semitone
(16:15). Sixths, by contrast, are not explained in this manner. Rather, they
arise by adding a perfect fourth and a third (Part 1, Chapter 13).

This method of interval generation does not relate thirds to sixths as
complementary intervals. In fact, it contradicts the inversional relationship
among thirds and sixths by using the major third to generate the major
sixth (perfect fourth + major third = major sixth) and using the minor
third to generate the minor sixth (perfect fourth + minor third = minor
sixth). For this reason, Zarlino would consider E-G-C, what we call a
“first-inversion major triad,” as a minor harmony because of the minor
third and minor sixth over the lowest voice; likewise, C-E-A, a “first-
inversion minor triad,” would be for him a major harmony. Thus, even if
he had conceived of triadic inversions, Zarlino might well have rejected
the idea since a “triad” would change its affect when inverted. Not until
the early seventeenth century do theorists begin to generate all intervals
along with their complements, thereby relating thirds and sixths as inver-
sions by their manner of generation.

Cadences

In general, Zarlino’s explanations of contrapuntal structure proceed on a
note-by-note basis. He never suggests explicitly (as do some later theorists)
that in the process of composing one should look ahead, plan on crucial
goals, and then fill in the resulting gaps. In general, as long as a point-to-
point voice leading does not break any rules, it is acceptable. In two areas,
however, he provides explanations that go beyond this. Both areas concern
cadences and strongly influenced later theorists.

Zarlino joins a long-standing tradition of theorists who explain that not
just any interval succession will end a phrase or a piece in a proper manner.
A section must end not only with a proper perfect consonance (a unison
or octave in two voices, for instance), but with a particular type of ap-

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 29 ===

proach leading to that final resting point. The unison is to be preceded by
a minor third, with chromatic alteration, if necessary; the octave by a
major sixth (Part 3, Chapter 53).® In this one area, theory traditionally
provided a functional harmonic preference rather than just the option of
any interval succession. That cadences are formulas in which the penulti-
mate sonority must move to the concluding sonority implies an underlying
harmonic functionality; within a phrase any verticality succession is pos-
sible if its presence does not violate voice-leading rules, but at cadences
only specific progressions are allowed.

The second area in which Zarlino adds a functional perspective builds
on this understanding of cadences. He notes that cadences “were devised
to mark off full sections of a larger harmonic composition and to punctuate
the complete sentences of the text . . . But to make intermediate divisions
in the harmony and text ... we may write those cadences which terminate
on the third, fifth, sixth, or similar consonances. Such an ending does not
result in a perfect cadence; rather this is now called evading the cadence
(fuggir la cadenza)” (Part 3, Chapter 53). That is, the figuration of the
parts will often imply an impending cadence. But before the cadence is
reached, one or another voice will move in such a manner that a perfect
cadence is evaded. As Zarlino writes, “It is fortunate that we have such
evaded cadences. They are useful when a composer in the midst of a
beautiful passage feels the need for a cadence but cannot write one” (ibid.).
This suggestive idea was not new with Zarlino. Nicola Vicentino (15 11—
c. 1576) antedates Zarlino with a similar passage (Vicentino 1555, Book
3, Chapter 24, pp. 51-52; commented on in Berger 1987, p. 136).

The idea that a composer “feels the need for a cadence”—that is, a
voice leading appears that functionally implies a specific goal—but evades
the cadence to continue the motion until heading toward a later goal,
appears in many seventeenth-century treatises. But prior to Rameau, no
theorist specified that this implies a functionality potentially present in
mid-phrase progressions as well as at cadences. Rameau adopted this
notion of evaded cadences and made it his principal explanation for the
continuity of harmonic progressions within phrases.

Zarlino and the Seconda Pratica

Zarlino and his pupils Artusi and Tigrini extoled the sacred style of Josquin
and Willaert and its evolution in the music of Palestrina—a style in which
variety is carefully measured, in which dissonances are relatively fleeting
and serve to enhance the consonances to which they lead, and in which

8. Earlier in Part 3, one example ends with a final octave preceded by a perfect fifth
(Marco and Palisca 1968, Ex. 39).

Zarlino and His Legacy

19


=== PAGE 30 ===

20

control over texture, line, and harmony has remained ever since a model
of classic purity. During Zarlino’s lifetime, however, other composers and
theorists began to challenge this tradition, especially in secular music. The
chief issues of contention concerned dissonance treatment, texture, and
the relationship of text to music. A complete account of the resulting
controversies would constitute a history of music and theory during much
of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Only a brief survey of the issues
most pertinent to eighteenth-century theory appears here.°

DISSONANCE TREATMENT
Zarlino and his predecessors generally understood dissonances as momen-
tary disruptions in a consonant musical surface. Dissonances provided
variety and emphasized the perfection of the consonances by a temporary
acerbity: “a dissonance causes the consonance which follows it to sound
more agreeable. The ear then grasps and appreciates the consonance with
greater pleasure, just as light is more delightful to the sight after darkness”
(Zarlino 1558, Part 3, Chapter 57). Contemporaneous theorists of the
newer styles challenged that view, arguing that dissonances were the most
important part of counterpoint and should be considered for their own
sake, not merely as incidental to consonances (Galilei 1581, 1588; dis-
cussed in Palisca 1956).

At the very beginning of the next century, Zarlino’s pupil Artusi clearly
articulated the underlying issues in an essay “on the imperfections of
modern music” (1600) by analyzing various excerpts from the as-yet
unpublished fifth book of madrigals by Claudio Monteverdi (1567-1643).
Artusi was no mere pedant attacking the new. He recognized the important
role played by dissonance in music, having published the first treatises
devoted primarily to dissonance treatment (Artusi 1589, 1598), in which
he relaxed some traditional restrictions on dissonance.

Artusi’s discussion of Monteverdi’s madrigals shows that even at the
inception of the dispute, defenders as well as critics of the new practices
understood them as elliptical instances of traditional voice leadings. The
argument between the defenders and the critics was over the propriety of
these ellipses. Artusi cites the passage from Monteverdi’s Cruda amarilli
shown in Example 1-9. The problematic dissonances are the A and F in
the highest voice: a ninth against the bass without a preparation or a
resolution, and then an unprepared seventh on a strong beat, occupying
half a measure. Artusi examines the explanations proposed by supporters
of Monteverdi, illustrates separately a simpler soprano part that is pre-
sumably the basis of the A and F, and finds the explanation of each

g. Palisca 1956, Palisca 1972a, Palisca 1983, and Federhofer 1964 offer more complete
accounts of various aspects of the disputes summarized here.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 31 ===

Example 1-9. Strunk 1950 pp. 395, 397

dissonance inadequate. The A, he is told, is supposed to arise as a neighbor

to the tenor G, and the F as a passing dissonance merely lengthened. Both’

explanations argue from missing notes either in the same or a different
register. And it is on this issue that Artusi takes exception: “The sense of
hearing does not perceive what it does not hear . . . How absurd it is to
say that the tenor sustains a note in one register while the soprano,
immediately afterward in a higher register, produces the effect the tenor
should have produced . . . especially after the rest” (Strunk 1950, p. 397).

When Monteverdi published Cruda amarilli in his Fifth Book of Mad-
rigals (1605), he responded to Artusi in the Preface. His brother Giulio
Cesare Monteverdi then published a “declaration” at the end of Claudio’s
Scherzi musicali (1607). Claudio promised to write a formal work explain-
ing the new practices, a promise he repeated as late as 1633.

But despite continuing polemic published from Rome to Warsaw over
the next few decades, a comprehensive rationale for the new dissonance
usages did not appear until the mid-1650s. The author was German
composer and theorist Christoph Bernhard (1627-1692), a pupil of Hein-
rich Schiitz (1585-1672) and Paul Siefert (1586-1666). Bernhard’s manu-
script, Tractatus compositionis augmentatus (c. 1655), circulated widely
in German-speaking areas.1° A composer in both the newer and older
styles, Bernhard imitates rhetorical treatises by expressing each type of
dissonance as a musical figure (“a way of employing dissonances,” p. 77),

10. Hilse 1973, p. 4, discusses dating the Tractatus. Federhofer 1958 discusses its sev-

enteenth-century circulation. Lester 1990 discusses the appearance of Bernhard’s figures in
Stierlein 1691, itself the source for articles in Walther 1732.

Zarlino and His Legacy

21


=== PAGE 32 ===

22

Example 1-10. Hilse 1973, pp. 81-82

conferring on each a Latin or Greek name."! He illustrates each dissonance
and shows its origin in strict voice leading, beginning with the relatively
simple usages of the strict style (stylus gravis), such as transitus (unaccented
passing tone or neighbor), quasi-transitus (passing tone on a weak beat),
and syncopatio (suspension). His explanation of the origin of the quasi-
transitus is representative (see Example 1-10).

The voice-leading reductions to simpler structures become ever more
complex for figures in the more elaborate style (stylus luxurians), which
contain skips in and out of dissonances, consecutive dissonances, and the
like. Some of these are shown in Example 1-11.

More extreme possibilities arise in the theatrical style (stylus theatralis),
including the ellipsis (“the suppression of a normally required conso-
nance,” p. 112), the abruptio (a rest between a dissonance and its resolu-
tion), and, especially, the heterolepsis: “the seizure of a second voice”
(p. 118) (see Example 1-12).

In these and other examples, Bernhard demonstrates a sophisticated
understanding of voice leading, especially with his clear distinction be-
tween a part and the various voices that are implied by that part. The
Tractatus is in this sense the work that explains the newer dissonance
usages as elaborations of strict voice leading, thereby demonstrating the
underlying unity of all musical dialects of the mid-seventeenth century. By

11. Dahlhaus notes that Bernhard’s Figurenlehbre reflects a German tradition in which
cantors were also often Latin teachers, knew their Quintilian, and used the difference
between grammar and rhetorical license to explain the foreign Italian style. Dahlhaus
concludes that Bernhard’s approach is thus separate from the Italian tradition that gave
rise to the seconda pratica (Dahlhaus 1989, pp. 140-141). But Bernhard’s method, although
more comprehensive than Monteverdi’s and Artusi’s and using the apparatus of Figuren, is
essentially the same as that of these Italians. The differences Dahlhaus cites are in the
clothing of the ideas, not in their essence.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 33 ===

transitus

oes

This example would naturally stand thus:

syncopatio syncopatio [etc.]

Naturally:

= 4

| aan

eu

AL

a

+
{etc.]
F 3

Example 1-11. Hilse 1973, pp. 92, 100

the end of the century, theorists could finally list what had been antago-
nistic positions about dissonances in a dispassionate manner. Thus, Charles
Masson, in his influential composition treatise of 1699, calmly notes three
reasons to use dissonances, borrowing one reason from proponents of the
newer styles and the other two from defenders of the older style: to project
harshness and a sad text, to add ornaments, and to fill in melodic intervals

(pp. 58-59).

TEXT SETTING AND TEXTURE
Although much of the heated controversy between the new and old styles
concerned dissonances, the underlying issues concerned text setting and
musical texture. Ironically, both sides traced their positions to the same
phrase in Plato’s Republic: the exhortation that “the harmony and the

em
The -_ voices would stand thus: It should be thus:
+
= ke |
g +
SF e

Example 1-12. Hilse 1973, pp. 118-119

Zarlino and His Legacy

23


=== PAGE 34 ===

24

rhythm must follow the words” (Strunk 1950, p. 4).!2 Zarlino read Plato’s
declaration in conjunction with the Greek philosopher’s warning that
music must not contain excesses and believed that an ideal setting of a
text would combine all the elements of music in a polyphony that projected
the text while maintaining a proper balance of variety, consonance and
dissonance, rhythm, and so forth. But Galilei was convinced that monody
and not polyphony was the ideal vehicle for expression of the text. The
Monteverdis defended the new dissonances by appealing to the expression
of the text. Artusi, in turn, did not regard textual expression as a justifi-
cation and omitted the text from the excerpts he cited.

PRIMA PRATICA AND SECONDA PRATICA

As a result of these disputes, it was obvious to all by the very early years
of the seventeenth century that two separate musical languages coexisted.
The terms prima pratica and seconda pratica (first and second practices)
were apparently so widespread by the turn of the century that Artusi used
seconda pratica in print for the first time in 1603 without defining it
(Artusi 1603, p. 16).

Even though some of the conflicts between the styles were reconciled
when Bernhard showed that dissonances in both shared a common ground,
the stylistic split remained a feature of the musical world in some form or
other into the eighteenth century. In addition to prima vs. seconda pratica
or stile antico vs. stile moderno, the contrast between relatively stricter
and freer styles was variously termed contrapunto osservato vs. contra-
punto commune by Girolamo Diruta (c. 1554—-after 1610) and Adriano
Banchieri (1568-1634), musica antica vs. musica moderna by Marco
Scacchi (c. 1602—-c. 1685), and contrapunctus gravis vs. contrapunctus
luxurians by Bernhard.

The stile antico, used primarily for sacred music, remained an active
style well into the eighteenth century by Catholic and Protestant composers
alike!3 and long remained a basis for teaching composition, whether via
species counterpoint or merely by recognizing a style with greater restric-
tions on dissonances and voice leading. Well into the eighteenth century,
theorists continued to categorize acceptable types of dissonances and mel-
odic lines according to the style of a composition.

The increased emphasis on the bass as a supporting voice in monodies
promoted the early development of thoroughbass, although the earliest
publication using the term basso continuo was actually a sacred collection
close to prima pratica in its dissonance treatment. Although thoroughbass

12. Marco and Palisca 1968, pp. xxii—xxiii, and Palisca 1983, especially pp. 153-155,
discuss this in more detail.
13. Wolff 1968 discusses J. S. Bach’s use of the stile antico.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 35 ===

as a performance technique was applied to music in the stile antico as well
as in the newer styles, musicians regarded thoroughbass as more closely
allied with the newer dissonance usages and voice leadings.

The new emphasis on the bass as a structural foundation, the resulting
need of thoroughbass performers, and the separate need of organists to
be able to accompany Lutheran chorales in a homophonic texture fostered
a growing awareness of chordal combinations. Theorists at the very be-
ginning of the seventeenth century developed the first fully harmonic
theories, classifying chords, recognizing triadic inversions, redefining
modes in terms of major and minor according to the triad built on the
tonic, and recommending composition by connecting the notes from one
triad to the next (discussed in Chapter 4).

Finally, the emphasis on text that first appeared as a humanistic concern
and that later resonated throughout the battles over the seconda pratica
called attention to relationships between language and music. Various
aspects of rhetoric were used to explain melodic construction, melodic
figures, and larger aspects of musical phrasing and continuity (aspects that
we nowadays treat under the subject of musical form).

Thus, the results of the stylistic split between prima and seconda pratica,
which itself grew out of the humanistic view of music promoted by Zarlino
and his predecessors, remained alive in the eighteenth-century theoretical
traditions enumerated at the opening of this chapter. The following chap-
ters explore each of these traditions in turn as they appeared in the early
eighteenth century.

Zarlino and His Legacy

25


=== PAGE 36 ===

CHAPTER TWO

CE OK SP

Species Counterpoint and
Fux’s Gradus

The way I teach counterpoint to our students is this: first I teach it to
them note against note, so that they learn to land on the consonances;
then with half notes and some syncopated whole notes against the can-
tus firmus, mixing dissonances with consonances if one can, avoiding
and sometimes alighting on perfect cadences (which are on the octave,
the fifteenth, or the unison). Finally, I teach them diminished [counter-
point], syncopated to such an extent that no entire beat ever occurs as a
whole note or a dotted half note. But when the counterpoint passes
through three or even four parts, I do not hold them to such strictness.

Lanfranco 1533, p. 119

TEACHING COUNTERPOINT by isolating different types or species of
voice interactions goes back at least to the early sixteenth century. Al-
though Giovanni Maria Lanfranco (c. 1490-1545) includes no musical
examples with this earliest-known description, his text clearly describes
note against note, two notes against one with occasional ties or suspen-
sions, and florid species, corresponding to first, second/fourth, and fifth
species in Fux’s classic Gradus ad parnassum (1725), published nearly
two centuries later.

To modern musicians, Fux’s pedagogical method appears so compelling
that the terms counterpoint and species counterpoint seem to be indisso-
lubly linked. But Fuxian species were by no means universal in counter-
point pedagogy either before or after 1725. Some theorists simply listed
all the possible successions from one consonance to another: all the ways
a unison could move to a minor third, to a major third, to a perfect fifth,
and so forth. Dissonance configurations were then listed separately. It is
hard to imagine how such a catalog of recommended, tolerable, and


=== PAGE 37 ===

prohibited interval successions could have been learned other than by
sheer rote memorization. In addition, this atomistic approach seems to
preclude any systematic discussion of structures larger than note-to-note
successions or involving more than two voices. Yet this tradition remained
alive and well from Johannes Tinctoris in the late fifteenth century to
Christoph Bernhard in the seventeenth century to Johann Mattheson
(1681-1764) in the mid-eighteenth century. A separate tradition of coun-
terpoint instruction, Zarlino’s differentiation into simple counterpoint
(note against note), diminished counterpoint (one florid part against long
notes), and free counterpoint (two florid parts), was the basis of innumer-
able seventeenth- and eighteenth-century methods. Finally, many discus-
sions of counterpoint before and after Fux were based on elaborations of
a multivoiced harmonic texture, whether a thoroughbass realization, as in
Friderich Erhard Niedt (c. 1674-1708), or a harmonic progression, as in
Johannes Lippius (1585-1612) or Heinrich Christoph Koch (1749-1816).

Each of these counterpoint methods has its own strengths and weak-
nesses and its own implications. This chapter concentrates on species
counterpoint, its evolution, various features of its presentation in Gradus,
and its influence.

Seventeenth-Century Formulations of Species

Among seventeenth-century writings concerned primarily with teaching
the fundamentals of music, several presented species counterpoint in some
form. An early example is the concise second part of II transilvano (1609)
by the Venetian musician Girolamo Diruta (c. 1554—after 1610), one of
the models for Fux’s Gradus. Like Gradus, II transilvano is in dialogue
format (the student being a Transylvanian—hence the title). Attempting
to avoid the countless rules and exceptions that characterize other treatises,
Diruta encapsulates the principles of consonant voice leading via four
types of movement (movimento):

From a perfect consonance to another perfect consonance, move in
contrary [including oblique] motion.

From an imperfect consonance to another imperfect consonance, move
freely.

From a perfect consonance to an imperfect consonance, move freely.

From an imperfect consonance to a perfect consonance, move by con-
trary motion and by a semitone [in one voice].

(Diruta 1609, p. 2; facsimile in Palisca 1958, col. 1538)

Innumerable later writers testify to the advantages of such brief universal
rules by adopting some formulation of them.
Diruta differentiates seven species of counterpoint against a cantus fir-

Species Counterpoint and Fux’s Gradus

27


=== PAGE 38 ===

28

mus in whole notes: whole notes, two half notes, consonant tied half
notes, dissonant tied half notes (suspensions), quarter notes, varied
rhythms with dissonances treated strictly (osservato), and varied rhythms
with dissonances treated more freely (commune). This species approach
allows Diruta to introduce both rhythmic complexities and new types of
dissonances one at a time. This is in contrast to Zarlino’s method, where
a student learned whole-note-against-whole-note writing with consonances
in simple counterpoint, and then had to absorb rhythmic complexities and
all sorts of dissonances all at once in florid counterpoint. As Diruta intro-
duces each new species, he offers an example, labels all the intervals (just
as Fux later did), and explains the voice leading note by note. Zarlino’s
influence is often felt (as in the suggestion to avoid consecutive conso-
nances of any size on p. 5), but the clarity and concision is entirely Diruta’s.

Lodovico Zacconi (1555-1627), a Venetian colleague of Diruta’s, in-
corporated many of Diruta’s examples in Book 2 of his Prattica di musica
seconda parte (1622, pp. 57-128) and consolidated Diruta’s seven species
into what became Fux’s five: whole notes, half notes, quarter notes, tied
notes, and mixed note values. Book 3 (pp. 129-248) treats counterpoint
without a cantus firmus, including imitation, canon, and invertible coun-
terpoint. Gradus copies not only Zacconi’s five species but also his orga-
nization, with separate sections for preliminary matters, species counter-
point, and imitative counterpoint.

Neither Diruta nor Zacconi deals with the dissonances of the seconda
pratica. In fact, Italian theorists publishing composition methods in the
seventeenth century dealt primarily with sacred music. As a result, there
are no discussions of seconda pratica dissonances akin to Bernhard’s
within the species counterpoint writers of this period. But newer practices
did gradually enter into treatises, such as those by Giovanni Maria Bon-
oncini (1642-1678) and Angel Berardi (c. 1636-1694). For instance,
Bononcini’s popular Musico prattico (Bologna, 1673 and 1688; Venice,
1678; partial German translation, 1701) includes both the standard res-
olutions of suspensions and the ones shown in Example 2-1. Among the
more modern features are consecutive dissonances (first and fourth ex-
cerpts), the ascending resolution of a suspended note with both voices
moving (second excerpt), skips from a suspension (third excerpt), and also
the presence of thoroughbass figures (fourth excerpt). This last feature
makes it clear that for Bononcini, the two voices shown do not necessarily
represent a two-part texture, but rather an outer-voice frame.

Berardi published two major treatises, one adopting Zarlino’s differen-
tiation of simple and diminished counterpoint (Documenti armonici,
1687), the other using a species approach to an extent unknown elsewhere,
with dozens of species (Miscellanea musicale, 1689, Book 1): some coun-
terpoints contain only steps or only skips, some use ostinatos (pitch ostin-

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 39 ===

{etc.]

8 7 3 {6} 8 7 3 6 7 8)7

5

7

5 fete.]

Example 2-1. Bononcini 1673, pp. 65-67. X represents a sharp.

atos, rhythm ostinatos, or both combined), some exclude any repetitions,
some omit various scale steps or intervals or use only a few scale steps or
intervals, some include imitations, some use a very wide range of intervals,
and so forth. The earlier work introduces twenty-four rules of counter-
point, the first four modifying Diruta’s four rules, some of the remaining
ones derived from Zarlino (proscribing consecutive thirds or sixths of the
same quality), and others being original. Fux found many of these rules
overly restrictive, although he often cited them without crediting Berardi
(as in the case of ottava battuta; Mann 1965§a, pp. 37-38).

In addition to his exhaustive study of traditional counterpoint, Berardi
also introduces usages suggesting contemporary instrumental styles. Ex-
ample 2-2 is “in a more modern manner” reminiscent of Arcangelo Corelli
(1653-1713), who had lived in Bologna and who published his works for
the first time just a few years before this treatise.

Far

. t = ae —————
ou — te = mF + =

Example 2-2. Berardi 1687, p. 143

Species Counterpoint and Fux’s Gradus

29


=== PAGE 40 ===

30

The treatises by Diruta, Zacconi, Bononcini, and Berardi are the major
published works oa species counterpoint preceding Fux’s Gradus. Many
aspects of Gradus are already present in one or more of them: the five
species, the four rules for consonances introduced at the beginning, use of
the various species to introduce rhythmic complexities and dissonances,
the dialogue format, the emphasis on stile antico, various specific usages,
the gradual ascent from simple species exercises in two voices toward
imitation and fugue, and the introduction of more modern usages based
on variants of strict counterpoint. But none of these seventeenth-century
authors was able to match Fux’s achievement—the consolidation of the
species approach into a comprehensive and convincing whole.

IMPROVISED SPECIES COUNTERPOINT

In addition to these works presenting species counterpoint in terms of
written composition, there are others that use contrapuntal species to teach
vocal improvisation—singing “above the book” (super librum) as Tinctoris
called it. For many centuries such extempore vocal improvisation was
probably an important training ground for composers. Vicente Lusitano
(2+?) presented the first methodical instructions for vocal improvisation in
1553, applying note against note, then two, three, and four notes against
one to vocal improvisation against a cantus firmus in two, three, and more
voices (1561 edition, fols. 12"-12", fols. 15'-16"). Lanfranco, quoted at
the beginning of this chapter, also probably referred to improvised and
not written counterpoint in 1533, in that he teaches his students “to land
on the consonances” (cadere su le Consonanze). Such improvised species
counterpoint lasted into the eighteenth century in at least some locations.
Brossard 1703 discusses “chanter sur le Livre,” and Padre Martini heard
four-voiced vocal improvisations (contrappunto alla mente) in 1747 in
Rome (Martini 1774-1775, Vol. 1, pp. 57-59). Madin 1742 gives instruc-
tions even while the author, a priest in Paris, acknowledges that it was no
longer practiced in many countries (p. 1). Yet Madin also reports on the
“veritable confusion from the mixture of intervals [that results] from 30
or so musicians intoning it all at the same time, some correctly and others
utterly randomly” (pp. 6-7).

Another aspect of vocal improvisation, adding ornaments to composed
pieces, was recognized as an important influence on composition in coun-
terpoint manuals of all types. For instance, Stierlein 1691 introduces many
of Bernhard’s dissonant figures as vocal ornaments (Lester 1990), and Fux
cites vocal improvisation as the origin of various dissonance usages. But
by the latter part of the seventeenth century, thoroughbass practiced at
the keyboard had replaced singing above the book and vocal ornamenta-
tion as the primary medium for compositional training via improvisation.
Although the very largest outlines of this development seem clear, the

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 41 ===

detailed study that will chronicle this momentous transformation in com-
positional process and its affects on musical styles has yet to be written.
In any event, Fux’s Gradus offers no hint that che species method is to be
used for anything other than learning written composition.

Gradus ad parnassum and the Pedagogy of Counterpoint

Of all the major theoretical treatises in the Western tradition, Gradus ad
parnassum (Vienna, 1725) by Johann Joseph Fux (1660-1741) in its
original text or literal translation has remained in practical use the longest.
It was quickly hailed as a pedagogic classic by Fux’s contemporaries, even
by those who disagreed with Fux on one or another matter;! was rendered
during the eighteenth century from its Latin original into German, Italian,
French, and English, either in literal translation or paraphrase; and was
used by numerous prominent eighteenth-century musicians, among them
Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven (Mann 1965a, pp. xi-xiv; Mann 1967,
1973, 1978-1979, 1987). It has been a model or at least a point of
departure for many works on counterpoint since its publication and, via
mid-twentieth-century translations into German and English, has remained
in use as a textbook down to the present time.

The lasting success of Gradus is based not only on the species method
but also on the work’s pedagogic organization and endearing literary style.
Fux published it in his sixty-fifth year, drawing on a lifetime’s experience
teaching not only composition but also the fundamentals of music to
choirboys at Saint Stephens in Vienna, where he was Kapellmeister from
1704. Fux extended the species approach to three and four voices. He
avoided the intricacies of Berardi’s twenty-four rules or Zarlino’s multiple
rules spread over dozens of chapters and interrupted by extended digres-
sions by offering a reformulation of Diruta’s four rules of consonant voice
leading, reordered and no longer requiring a semitone in one voice when
moving from an imperfect to a perfect consonance. Fux’s formulation of
these four rules recurs in innumerable works throughout the century,
regardless of their orientation. Even the 1756 treatise by Johann Friedrich
Daube (c. 1730-1797), which teaches thoroughbass via Rameau-inspired

1. Mattheson, who engaged Fux in an acerbic correspondence concerning modes, major-
minor keys, and solmization systems (Mattheson 1725, pp. 185-205), penned an ode in
honor of a never-completed German translation of Gradus by Georg Philipp Telemann
(1681-1767) (Mattheson 1731, p. 181). Lorenz Mizler (1711-1778) translated Gradus
into German in 1742, although his annotations show that he disagreed with Fux on many
matters. J. S. Bach apparently owned a copy of the Gradus (Benary [1961], p. 78). C. P. E.
Bach reports that his father “started his pupils right in with what was practical, and omitted
all the dry species of counterpoint that are given in Fux and others” (David and Mendel

1966, p. 279).

Species Counterpoint and Fux’s Gradus

31


=== PAGE 42 ===

32

harmony, praises Fux’s rules (preface). Some later musicians noted that
the four rules could be reduced further. Beethoven suggested two rules
(one for motion into perfect consonances and one for imperfect conso-
nances); Padre Martini noted that the only prohibition is direct motion
into a perfect consonance (Mann 19658, p. 22). Finally, Fux attempted to
reduce the influence of changing musical styles on the rules of counterpoint
by insisting that vocal style, not the instrumental influences seen in Bon-
oncini and Berardi, was its proper foundation.

For Fux, all that is needed to begin counterpoint is a list of consonances
and the four rules of voice leading. From this simple basis, Fux proceeds
through species counterpoint in two, three, and four voices; turns to
imitation, fugue, and invertible counterpoint; and concludes the treatise
with a survey of musical figures and affects and the requirements of various
contemporary styles. He relegates to a forty-two-page introduction those
matters (such a interval generation) still deemed necessary in a formal
treatise. As a result, the student learns local interactions of intervals via
the species; the cantus firmus and repetitious rhythms of the individual
parts remove from consideration such issues as texture and rhythmic
relations among the parts. The section on imitation and fugue focuses on
precisely these issues and also the use of motives. When the student has
mastered all this, Fux imparts his advice on modes and on a range of
stylistic issues.

The body of the work (Fux 1725, pp. 43-279) is cast as a dialogue
between Josephus (Fux as an eager student) and Aloysius, representing
Palestrina, the master “to whom I owe everything that I know of this art”
(Mann 196§a, p. 18).2 Throughout the dialogue, Josephus puts into prac-
tice the precepts handed down by Aloysius, continually raising the sorts
of questions a student would have and occasionally making mistakes and
correcting them or having them corrected by Aloysius. Numerous earlier
works had illustrated good and bad voice leadings. But no other work so
realistically portrays a pupil progressing to a substantial composer under
constant tutelage. Readers, conscientiously working out all the examples,
could easily imagine themselves, as the young Haydn probably did, study-
ing along with a colleague under the guidance of a master: “[Haydn]
worked his way through the whole method, did the exercises, put them
by for several weeks, and looked them over again and polished them until
he thought he had got them right” (Griesinger 1810, p. 10; Gotwals 1963,
p. 10).

Fux introduces all rules and voice-leading recommendations via the
exercises and their emendations, imparting only what a student needs to

2. At one point, Fux forgets this pose and Aloysius refers to Palestrina in the third person
(Lester 1989, p. 195).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 43 ===

know at any given point in order to do the exercises and gain composi-
tional experience. Absent are extended preliminary discussions of rules as
in Diruta 1609 and Bononcini 1673 (such as the rhythmic circumstances
in which consecutive perfect consonances might or might not be accepta-
ble, and how best to use consecutive thirds or sixths).

This relaxed manner in which Fux introduces and modifies his rules is
both one of the signal merits of Gradus and one of its most maddening
features. For instance, Fux explains that a counterpoint should begin with
a perfect interval; but when Josephus begins his second counterpoint
exercise in the D-mode with a G in the lower voice, Aloysius must briefly
explain that this particular fifth is unacceptable because it violates his
sense of modal propriety (Mann 1965§a, p. 31). A full explanation of
modes, which would certainly have interrupted the beginning exercises if
placed here, does not occur until quite a bit later, after the study of fugue
and imitation (Fux 1725, pp. 221-231; Lester 1989, pp. 189-196). Sim-
ilarly, not until Josephus needs the information for three-part writing does
Aloysius explain why the rule prohibiting similar motion into a perfect
interval needs to be relaxed in writing for more than two voices (Mann,
1965a, pp. 76-77).

This very approach, however, yields numerous passages where the lack
of systematization and formal rules leads to confusion over the criteria
involved. For instance, at the very end of first species in two voices, there
is a discussion of the propriety of raising the leading tone three measures
before the end of an exercise so that Fi-G-F#-G will occur instead of the
“harsh relation” F-G-F#-G (p. 39). A careful student will have noted that
the identical “harsh relation” had arisen previously and arises later without
correction or comment.

Likewise, a careful reader might wonder about skips outlining a tritone.
In the fourth exercise, Aloysius emends the ascending skip F-B to F-C
(p. 35). Two exercises later, Josephus uses the ascending succession F-A-
Bb. When should Bb be used? When C? And why does Aloysius let stand
the ascending succession F-G-B-D not long afterwards (p. 47)? Fux prob-
ably avoided an explicit discussion because it would have involved bal-
ancing complex modal and contrapuntal issues: Bb is not appropriate in
the first instance because the exercise is in the E-mode, just before a
stepwise line leading to the final; the second instance is in the F-mode,
where Bb is generally preferable to B; in the third instance Bb is not possible
because of a sustained E in the cantus firmus, and the melodic pattern F-
G-C-D would have been more problematic.

Similar issues arise throughout the treatise. Eighteenth-century musi-
cians were aware of these problems. Nicolas Framery (1745-1810), a
French musician active in founding the Conservatoire (Gessele 1989,
Chapters 2 and 5), probably spoke for many eighteenth-century musicians

Species Counterpoint and Fux’s Gradus

33


=== PAGE 44 ===

34

when he criticized “the obscurity of the principles and their developments.
All that one can admire is the marvelous sagacity of the student who
comprehends at the first word things that masters themselves would un-
derstand only with difficulty” (Azopardi 1786, p. 11).

In Fux’s defense, this very lack of systematization is the essence of his
method—to develop ever-greater sophistication as students approach com-
positional problems of ever greater complexity, leading them to realize
that as composers they will constantly have to weigh alternatives. Consider
the discussion where Josephus avoids a potential tied note in fourth species
because it would lead to a “bad repetition” (Mann 1965a, pp. 60-61).
Repetitions occur in earlier and later exercises. Fux’s point is not to
prohibit them but to introduce yet another criterion to the developing
composer’s sense of discrimination. Marginalia by Haydn and Beethoven,
commenting on various voice leadings in Fux’s examples, confirm that
they used Gradus in just this way.? To the extent that Gradus succeeds
either as a pedagogical text or a source for structural counterpoint, this is
one of its signal strengths.

Another superior feature of Fux’s pedagogy is the length and variety of
his cantus firmi. In contrast to a single inordinately long cantus firmus or
merely an ascending and descending scale, as found in some other treatises,
Fux maintains a different cantus firmus for each mode. The melodies are
about a dozen notes in length—long enough to allow for a variety of
motions between the circumscribed opening of the phrase and the obli-
gatory cadence, but not so long that flabby lines will be inevitable (al-
though surely many of the quarter-note exercises do wander aimlessly).

A final aspect of Gradus that has enhanced its status as a pedagogic
classic is its relative abstraction from any particular compositional style.
Zarlino had written about compositional practices of the generation pre-
ceding his. Later writers on counterpoint had attempted to keep up to
date in their recommendations. Fux’s approach is different. Although the
inclusion of sections discussing contemporary styles toward the end of
Gradus clearly illustrates his intent to write for a contemporary audience,
he also strongly believed that the underlying basis of musical composition
should be unaffected by stylistic mannerisms. He concludes the treatise
with a parable relating musical styles to fashions in dress and architecture:

If one were to dress today in the style of fifty or sixty years ago, certainly he
would expose himself to ridicule. Music, too, should be suited to the times.
But never have I found a tailor familiar with the new fashions, nor have I
heard tell of one, who attached shirt sleeves to the thigh or to the knee; nor
of any architect who was so foolish as to put the foundation of a building

3. Many of Haydn’s comments appear in the critical report to the 1967 facsimile edition
of Gradus; some of Beethoven’s comments appear in Mann 196 a, especially pp. 125-126.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 45 ===

on top of the roof. Yet we see and hear such things everywhere in music,
not without bringing disappointment to those of taste, and shame to art
when the fundamental precepts of nature and art are inverted from their
proper place, and the foundation is put above while the other parts are put
below without regard for the proper foundation. Indeed, Joseph, no matter
how much you strive for novelty and invention by exerting all the powers of
your times, nothing can overturn, much less destroy, the rules of art which
imitate nature and which achieve the ends of nature. (Lester 1989, p. 209)

Fux aimed to present what he considered this undying foundation of
musical structure, believing it was exemplified in the music of Palestrina.
In this sense Fux stands as the last important theorist of the prima pratica
tradition, following the line running from Zarlino and Artusi through
many of the seventeenth-century Italian writers. As a composer, Fux wrote
in both practices—operas and trio sonatas in the latest style and a cappella
liturgical music.

It is clear from modern scholarship, especially that of Jeppesen, that the
usages in Gradus do not agree in numerous ways with either the details
or the spirit of Palestrina’s music. In addition, it is significant that when
Fux refers to music of the sixteenth century, he cites only Palestrina. Earlier
theorists, closer to that era chronologically, refer to a much wider range
of composers; Bernhard, for instance, cites Palestrina as well as Josquin
(c. 1440-1521), Willaert (c. 1490-1562), Morales (c. 1500-1553), Gom-
bert (c. 1500-c. 1556), and Francesco Soriano (1549-1621). By Fux’s
lifetime, the music of Palestrina’s time had become more of a venerated
symbol of idealized polyphony than a known repertoire.

One seemingly archaic aspect of Gradus, however, was not included
solely in homage to the past. Fux based the entire work on the six authentic
church modes because that was what he considered to be the sole basis of
contemporary music. As discussed in Lester 1989, Fux’s use of modes was
only one part of a complex of traditions that kept the church modes alive
as an aspect of contemporary music well into the eighteenth century,
especially in German-speaking areas. Eight years after defending the modes
against Mattheson’s call for the adoption of major and minor keys, Fux
does not even mention the keys anywhere in Gradus, not even when
Josephus asks about those who hold differing opinions on nature of the
modes (Lester 1989, p. 189). Fux was thereby in agreement with Italian
contrapuntal theory in the seventeenth century, which by and large did
not deal with the major-minor keys either.

Gradus and the Discipline of Species Counterpoint

In recent decades, partly because of the central role it plays in Schenkerian
» partly play:
perspectives on tonal music, species counterpoint has acquired significance

Species Counterpoint and Fux’s Gradus

35


=== PAGE 46 ===

36

apart from the historical importance of Fux’s treatise and of species as a
pedagogical method within the eighteenth century. Schenker’s works, in
addition to using concepts drawn from species counterpoint, include pro-
vocative commentaries on Gradus (especially in Schenker 1987). Schenker
treats tenets of species counterpoint apart from their context within Fux’s
work and within the eighteenth century. Schenker seems to have believed
that the species method originated with Fux (Schenker 1954, p. 180), and
he also was apparently unaware of other types of contrapuntal writings
circulating during Fux’s lifetime, even Bernhard’s Tractatus (published in
1926), which seemingly would have been of great interest to him with its
suggestive notions of simple structures underlying complex dissonance
patterns (Federhofer 1982). Furthermore, Schenker seems not to have paid
much attention to the later portions of Gradus where Fux considers more
contemporary styles, leading Schenker to consider Gradus primarily as a
work on strict counterpoint rather than as a composition method.

Interest in the role of Gradus in the eighteenth century has also focused
on the intense interest of the major composers of the Classical era in
counterpoint. Earlier generations of historians, noting the relative absence
of polyphonic surface textures in Classical music (at least in comparison
to the music of J. S. Bach), often stressed the harmonic roots of the classical
style. But it is now clear that Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven shared an
abiding interest in contrapuntal aspects of voice leading as it affected their
own music (Mann 1973). Furthermore, contrapuntal passages in their
music often mimic species exercises (such as the opening of the finale of
Mozart’s String Quartet, K. 387).

As a result, many of the concepts in Gradus have gathered meanings
that are not quite those that they have in the context of Fux’s work in the
early eighteenth century. Considering all these meanings as they appear in
modern theory and history would take the present study far from its
course. Chapter 7 discusses the application of Fuxian counterpoint later
in the eighteenth century. The current discussion is directed instead pri-
marily to defining two central issues as they appear within Gradus: first,
the extent to which Fux considers motion among consonances to be a
structural frame within which both consonant and dissonant diminutions
arise; and second, the extent to which simultaneity-to-simultaneity succes-
sions arise from the voice leading of individual lines rather than the

progression of chords.

THE STRUCTURAL FRAME AND DIMINUTION

In a Schenkerian perspective, counterpoint controls voice leading between
structural points at each level of a composition. Many musicians today
believe that this process of diminution is implicit in the species approach
itself: after learning note-against-note interactions using only consonant

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 47 ===

Diminution

= =

letc.}

Example 2-3. Mann 196 §a, p. 41

whole notes, the student learns how to put additional events between these
downbeats in the quicker-moving counterpoints of later species. But al-
though this mode of thinking plays an important role in other theoretical
traditions of the time, it is not central in Gradus. And the relatively limited
areas where it does appear in Gradus are those in which the concept had
been used for many generations.

Composition via diminution is the core of Part 2 of Niedt’s thoroughbass
manual (1706). As discussed more fully in Chapter 3 of this study, Niedt
generates several complete dance movements by applying ever more com-
plex variations to a brief chordal thoroughbass realization. In addition,
harmonic theorists, from Lippius in the early seventeenth century through
Rameau’s followers in the eighteenth century, demonstrate how elabora-
tions of a given chordal structure can produce complex textures.

Fux considered such elaborative methods inimical to what he was trying
to teach via species counterpoint. He disparaged thoroughbass approaches
that claimed they could teach a student to compose after a few months of
study. For him composition was not to be learned by applying elaborations
to an underlying structure. Rather, it required long study of voice leading
and texture—slow ascent of the Steps to Parnassus, as stated in the title.
Thus Fux never applies diminution to the actual composition of counter-
point (either with or without a cantus firmus). When the task is to compose
a new counterpoint on a given cantus firmus, the object is to create a new
counterpoint, not to rework a previous exercise.

Fux does use diminution to explain the origin of various types of dis-
sonances. For instance, an unaccented passing tone in second species, the
very first dissonance-type introduced, is a diminution “filling out the space
between two notes that are a third distant from each other” (Mann 1965a,
p. 41) (see Example 2-3). Similar examples reduce quarter-note passing
tones and neighbors to “their original forms” (p. 51) and tied notes to
their basis “if the retardation were removed” (p. 56).

After the study of the species and of imitation and fugue, Fux uses
diminution to explain two additional dissonance patterns—variation and
anticipation:

[Variation] differs from regular diminution in that regular diminution arises

only when notes progress by skips of a third: [see Example 2-4]. Variation
arises when notes proceed by step [see Example 2-5]. This example demon-

Species Counterpoint and Fux’s Gradus

37


=== PAGE 48 ===

38

Diminution

je SS

o- Fag

uo uo

Example 2-4. Lester 1989, p. 185

strates clearly that variation departs from the common rules of counterpoint
in that it proceeds by skips from a consonance into a dissonance [at E to C],
and then from a dissonance into another dissonance [at C to A]—this is
certainly not allowed in counterpoint, but is commonly allowed in compo-
sition. (Lester 1989, pp. 185-186)

After showing several other similar types of variations, Fux treats antici-
pations as shown in Example 2-6.

That is the extent of Fux’s understanding of dissonances by diminution.
He is not even sure of the propriety of variations and anticipations. These
“departures from the rules of counterpoint” arose because singers “were
so little content with regular diminutions and so fond of showing off the
flexibility of their voice” (Lester 1989, p. 188). Using as his evidence these
rather tepid dissonant figures, Fux launches a vociferous condemnation of
singers for their “destruction of the harmony.”

He returns to dissonances one last time in the discussion of recitatives
(Lester 1989, pp. 204-209), offering an example, (2-7), to which Josephus
reacts with horror: “It seems that the instrumental chords, which consist
mostly of dissonances, depart from all the rules of counterpoint.”

Instead of attempting to explain the dissonances as elaborations of a
simpler structure, as Artusi and Bernhard had done with such sophistica-
tion generations earlier, Fux argues that in effect there is no explanation.
These dissonances are simply “considered good according to the nature

Variation

et

e

Example 2-5. Lester 1989, p. 186

a
rrrfr -rert

Example 2-6. Lester 1989, p. 187

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 49 ===

ra a oto ares
ty a
spigieehs PSS eeets
- mi-ne one in fu ro. re tu argue av ome. one- que in is ra ua cor
4 t | —=
; ——
i}
——— ZZ 7 2. |
46 17 3
4 4
g

= ee

mi- se-re- re me- i Do- mi- ne quo- ni- am in fir- mus sum

TF FR

sa- na sa- na me Do- mi- ne quo- ni- am con-tur-ba- ta sunt OS- sa me- a.

= BS =

Example 2-7. Lester 1989, p. 205

9

of recitative .. . In this style one should pay attention less to the harmonies
than to the expression of the meaning of the words.” Examples ensue
illustrating common recitative patterns that express various sentiments
and various types of grammatical constructions (complete sentences, ques-
tion marks, commas, etc.).

Fux thus joins the prima pratica tradition running back through Zarlino
in which dissonances are relatively brief disruptions of consonant voice
leading, even when they create a progressive functionality leading to a
cadence. From that perspective, Fux could only consider his mild variations
and anticipations as violations of the strict style. For the rest, it was as if
the seconda pratica and its theory had never existed. He endured the
dissonances common in early eighteenth-century recitatives as given rhe-
torical figures to be learned by rote—set a question this way, an answer
that way; set a king’s speech this way, a knave’s that way. In brief, his

Species Counterpoint and Fux’s Gradus

39


=== PAGE 50 ===

40

[etc.]

Example 2-8. Diruta 1609, p. 3

understanding of dissonant diminution techniques does not extend beyond
the simplest patterns.

Early-eighteenth-century theoretical traditions other than species coun-
terpoint imparted to dissonance additional important roles in musical
structure. Thoroughbass theorists, for instance, knew that an overwhelm-
ing majority of possible bass figurings included dissonances. Because of
their required preparation and resolution, these dissonances played a major
role in determining the harmonic context in which a chord could appear.
Rameau built on this tradition, treating dissonances as crucial and neces-
sary to determine harmonic function and direction. Thus, an eighteenth-
century musician seeking a contemporary understanding of dissonances
more complex than simple passing tones, neighbors, and suspensions
would turn to thoroughbass or harmonic writers but not to Fux.

Diminution techniques also arise in Gradus to explain various nondis-
sonant voice leadings. Thus, Fux includes the traditional explanation for
proscribing hidden fifths and octaves: diminution reveals the concealed
voice-leading problem. Fux’s examples (Mann 1965a, p. 33) are similar
to those in Diruta 1609 (see Example 2-8).

Apart from diminution techniques, one might seek evidence of working
from a structural frame in Fux’s repeated admonitions that students should
look ahead as they work out exercises: “consider the ending before you
start to write” (Mann 1965a, p. 42); “I should like to urge you .. . not
only to pay attention to the measure upon which you are working but
also to those following” (p. 48). In the hands of the some thoroughbass
writers, this long-range perspective occasionally leads to insights into a
large-scale voice-leading frame for simultaneity-to-simultaneity progres-
sions. By contrast, Fux offers his advice to avoid problems on the com-
positional surface of the music: “I want to remind you again to pay the
utmost attention to measures following; otherwise, you may sometimes
find yourself unable to go on” (p. 53); “it is most important to consider
whether a correct progression will be possible from the chord of the first
measure built up this way, to the second, third, or even fourth measures”

(p. 111).
Countless additional passages confirm that Fux’s primary focus is di-

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 51 ===

fete.)

Example 2-9. Mann 196§8, p. 51

rected toward the musical surface, not toward any abstractions drawn
from that surface, no matter how they are conceived. For instance, he
includes the cambiata figure shown in Example 2-9 not because it is
symbolic of any structural meaning, but because it is a part of the surface
of sixteenth-century music. In fact, the rhythm in which Fux cites the
cambiata figure is comparatively rare in Palestrina’s music (Jeppesen 1970,
p. 212).

In sum, modern musicians have found suggestions of diminution in
Fux’s explanations of simple dissonance patterns sanctioned by centuries
of use, and then extended these principles to include a host of diminution
techniques. But these extensions, which may indeed be quite useful in
many ways, lay outside of Fux’s conceptual universe. With more compre-
hensive approaches to dissonances readily available elsewhere, it is hardly
likely that eighteenth-century musicians turned to Gradus or to species
counterpoint for information on how complex motions of any sort (con-
sonant or dissonant) could arise within a given voice-leading frame. They
found in Gradus a clear method for learning to manipulate intervals and
for dealing with lines, rhythms, motives, and textures, and a provocative
gateway to the romance of counterpoint of the Golden Age. But their
approach to freer dissonances (even the most commonly used dissonances)
and to large-scale diminutions could not have come from species counter-
point or Fux’s Gradus. Those features were simply not present there in
the eighteenth century.

INTERVALLIC VOICE LEADING AND HARMONY
The basis of Fux’s species counterpoint seems to lie in composing two
voices that relate to each other intervallically and then learning to control
additional voices in the same manner. But several aspects demonstrate
both that Fux’s approach is less consistently intervallic than it may seem
and that because of his limited vocabulary for dealing with harmonies,
Fux seems at times unable to express himself clearly on various harmonic
matters that he chose to raise.

The most revealing passage appears at the beginning of the discussion
of three-part counterpoint. Fux is faced with the age-old problem of

Species Counterpoint and Fux’s Gradus

41


=== PAGE 52 ===

42

explaining how more than two voices relate to one another. He must give
guidance before allowing Josephus to begin writing three-part counter-
point because some interactions that are consonant against the bass, such
as a simultaneous fifth and sixth, will produce unwanted dissonances. Fux
could have explained that all voice interactions should be checked for
dissonances. But that would have required a further discussion of why the
fourth, which is dissonant against the bass, is acceptable between upper
voices. Fux’s solution is temporarily to abandon working from a cantus
firmus while he explains the triad (trias).

Fux at first defines the term triad quite literally as a third and a fifth
over the bass. Although “the harmonic triad should be employed in every
measure if there is no special reason against it” (Mann 196§a, p. 71), this
is not always possible. “Occasionally, for a better melodic line, one uses
a consonance not properly belonging to the triad, namely, a sixth or [NB!]
an octave” (p. 72). Fux uses the concept of the triad here not to explain
how pitches or intervals belong to harmonies but primarily to control
texture by urging the presence of three pitch classes in as many simul-
taneities as possible (to use modern terms)—hence the octave is “a con-
sonance not properly belonging to the triad.” In this passage Fux’s notion
of the triad is quite close to Zarlino’s perfect harmony except that Zarlino,
of course, had never used the term triad.

Immediately thereafter, Fux considerably expands his triadic perspective
to include the first inversion. He illustrates a C-major triad with C in the
bass, and then with E in the bass and C on top, explaining that in a
harmony with a third and sixth over the bass, the note making a sixth
over the bass “should be considered as if it were moved from its proper
place [in the bass] to an unusual one [in an upper voice] . . . in its proper
place [it] establishes the harmonic triad” (Mann 1965a, p. 74). Fux thus
shows his awareness of a theory of triadic inversions dating back at least
as far as Otto Siegfried Harnish (c. 1568-1623) in 1608 and Johannes
Lippius (1585-1612) in 1610, both of whom explicitly recognized inver-
sions of the triad in terms of the removal of the bass note to another
position (Lester 1989, pp. 31-33, 39-41).

To illustrate all this, Fux introduces a unique example. In contrast to
every other such exercise in the entire dialogue on species counterpoint,
no voice is specified as a cantus firmus. And instead of beginning a dis-
cussion with the D-mode (as he invariably does elsewhere), Fux writes the
example, shown in 2-10, in the C-mode, with a fundamental harmonic
progression more like a progression in C-major than voice leading in the
C-mode.

There are triads, in Fux’s definition of the term, only in measures 1 and
5, and an inverted triad in measure 4. Josephus wonders why full triads
are not possible in additional measures, proposing the emendation of

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 53 ===

J 2 3 5 6
f ‘
12 10 8 5 8
2 rey | e _ 3 |
10 8 6 3 8
=
= + =

Example 2-10. Mann 196§A, p. 72

measures 2 and 3 shown in Example 2-11. Aloysius replies, “Your alter-
ation is not bad and your example is not to be considered wrong.” But
he clearly prefers the version in Example 2-10. Some of the reasons he
offers for this preference do not stand up to scrutiny. He notes that the
tenor in Example 2-10 moves by step at first, which is better than the skip
that begins Example 2-11. Furthermore, the tenor in Example 2-10 has
only one A, whereas Josephus’ alteration has two, violating the principle
of variety. Unfortunately for Aloysius’ argument, the overwhelming ma-
jority of exercises in Gradus would have to be rewritten if these were the
standards for good lines.

Aloysius is also concerned with the harmony in measure 3 of Example
2-11, explaining that over solmization syllable mi (in this case, the bass E
in measure 3) a sixth is preferable to a fifth when the bass progresses from
mi to fa (that is, ascends a semitone). Fux apparently hears the E+G of
measure 3 as implying an E-minor triad, not the desired C-major triad
with E in the bass. The recommendation to use a sixth over mi is com-
monplace in thoroughbass manuals of the period, where it explains how
the third and seventh degrees in major keys best support first-inversion
triads. But it is anomalous in Gradus. It is a harmonic, not an intervallic
explanation. And it concerns scale steps in a major key, which Fux does

=
12 10 8 5 8
e
= oe = ° a =
10 5 3 3 j 3 8 i

Example 2-11. Mann 196§8, p. 73

Species Counterpoint and Fux’s Gradus


=== PAGE 54 ===

44

10 10

oe]
- = = 5 == == =

Example 2-12. Mann 196§a, p. 76

wd]

o = 6
ag
I
q
tit
¢
Hn
q
q
qt

a
w
w
oc
we
we
ry
we
w
cs

not acknowledge. He applies this recommendation most consistently in
the C-mode, the F-mode, and the G-mode—the modes closest to major
scales. In the E-mode he commonly harmonizes an E in the bass with a
fifth, not a sixth, even in the succession E-F (Mann 1965a, pp. 114-115).

Josephus tries his hand at two more emendations of the progression in
Example 2-10 amid growing confusion about Fux’s reasons for introduc-
ing this discussion. See Example 2-12. Aloysius remarks on the diminished
fifth between middle and upper voices in measure 2 of the first exercise
but not on the comparable augmented fourth of the second example. But
he does not mark any of these examples as being wrong. (Fux uses a “first-
inversion diminished triad” as the standard cadential approach-chord
when the cantus firmus is in the bass [pp. 80, 83, and 84, passim]. But he
never addresses the consonance-dissonance of this cadential sonority, in
which the sixth over the bass, a dissonant tone against the third over the
bass, resolves a suspension.)

It seems that Examples 2-10, 2-11, and 2-12 are more in C major than
in the C-mode and that Fux is searching for reasons to promote “I-vii°®-
I®” instead of “I-ii-iii” or “I-ii-I®” in the first three measures. This was a
major issue at the time. Not long before 1725, the régle de l’octave in
thoroughbass treatises began to enshrine “I-vii°*-I®” as the standard pro-
gression over a rising or descending bass involving scale-steps 1, 2, and 3,
rejecting the older notion that the normal chord over any bass note was
a “root-position” triad. Half a century later, Padre Martini confirmed this
historical development, using similar progressions (“I-ii-I” vs. “vii?°-I”) to
illustrate the difference between the old-fashioned and modern ways of
writing chords over a stepwise bass (Martini 1774-1775, Vol. 1, pp. 224—
225):

But Fux—without a clear sense of key, which other theorists of his and
an earlier period had, and without a more systematic way of dealing with
harmonic structures and progressions—has no working vocabulary to offer
this advice. A puzzling question is why he introduced these examples at

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 55 ===

LS
Pest Py

Example 2-13. J. S. Bach, Well-Tempered Clavier I: Prelude in C major,
mm. 1-4, voice leading

all, since they seem to be out of place in his discussion of species counter-
point. But whatever his reason for placing this discussion at the very
beginning of the discussion of three-voice writing, its presence is revealing.
First, it shows the limitations of his perspective to give advice on choosing
among harmonic possibilities. And second, it shows his awareness of
harmonic progressions and their importance despite his difficulties in ex-
plaining these matters.

Another matter concerning harmony is Fux’s implicit understanding that
the bass is the voice supporting the structure. Unlike Zarlino and other
theorists of counterpoint through Bontempi (1695), who had calculated
the notes in multivoiced chords in relation to the tenor, Fux always seems
to assume that if the cantus firmus is not in the bass, then the bass is the
first voice to be worked out against the cantus firmus. How could one
know whether an upper-voice fourth, augmented fourth, or diminished
fifth were possible unless one knew the bass note? Significantly, Fux never
raises the issue. It was an underlying assumption of the eighteenth century
that did not have to be mentioned because it was so universally held.

Finally, Fux’s limited chordal perspective makes it impossible for him
to deal with consonant diminutions, which are explained by other eigh-
teenth-century approaches as arpeggiations. Albrechtsberger, when he
taught species counterpoint later in the century, considered all interac-
tions—even first species in two parts—to represent complete chords. And
Mozart, when he taught species counterpoint, thought the same way (as
discussed in Chapter 7). Arpeggiation as an explanation for skips was a
possibility for Albrechtsberger and Mozart and was an important part of
thoroughbass and harmony treatises, but was outside of Fux’s domain.

EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY HARMONIES ABSENT FROM GRADUS

The voice-leading patterns imposed by the species approach combined
with Fux’s own limited harmonic vocabulary leave many commonplace
early-eighteenth-century harmonic usages outside the boundaries of Gra-
dus. These include all sorts of “nonharmonic tones” and second-inversion
triads (which will not arise with only one voice moving in a note-against-
note texture except over a bass pedal; Mann 1965a, pp. 98-99). And
although some types of suspension patterns do arise, other common man-
ifestations that make “seventh chords” do not (see Example 2-13). In fact,

Species Counterpoint and Fux’s Gradus

45


=== PAGE 56 ===

46

no systematic treatment of seventh chords, even of the 6/5 chord (which
arises occasionally even in Palestrina’s music), is possible, although occa-
sional passing “chord sevenths” occur (Mann 1965a, p. 122). These and
a host of other voice-leading patterns faced theorists of the early eighteenth
century. Thoroughbass theory attempted with differing degrees of success
to organize them into rational categories. And the problems that remained
unsolved by contrapuntal and thoroughbass theorists were one of the
factors motivating Rameau’s harmonic perspective.

Gradus and Its Heritage

The very traits that made it possible for Fux to have written Gradus were
also the source of many of the aspects of the work discussed above. Fux
was a conservative man, respectful of tradition—the son of a peasant, who
by hard work rose to hold the most exalted musical positions in imperial
Austria. His reverence for tradition is nowhere more clearly set forth than
in his correspondence with Mattheson. Not only will he have nothing to
do with what he thought of as the newfangled idea of major and minor
keys (regarding them as an impoverishment of musical resources because
they are merely transpositions of two modes), but he insists that the early
medieval system of six-syllable solmization, complete with hexachordal
mutation, remains the best method for teaching children how to sing,
citing the medieval Guido d’Arezzo as his source of authority and his
lifetime of practical experience teaching this method as proof. Indeed, it
is likely that Haydn learned to read music via six-syllable solmization in
this very way when he was a choirboy at Saint Stephens in Vienna.
Fux’s reverence for the past led him to spend a lifetime honing the
traditions of the prima pratica, handed down from Zarlino through the
Italian theorists of the seventeenth century, into the work that we know
as Gradus. Even in a matter as relatively minor as naming the modes, Fux
is the sole theorist after the middle of the seventeenth century to adopt
Zarlino’s idiosyncratic reading of the Greek theorists, calling the D-mode
Ionian, the E-mode Dorian, the F-mode Phrygian, and so forth, bypassing
the universally accepted names for the modes (Lester 1989, p. 11). Fux
was practical enough to avoid confusion in Gradus by generally referring
to the modes by the pitch name of their final. That he was aware of these
names is another sign of his reverence for what he regarded as an ancient
authoritative truth, even if contemporary practice did not recognize it. But
Fux, while maintaining Zarlino’s modal names, abandoned Zarlino’s re-
vised ordering of the modes and returned to an even earlier tradition that
put the D-mode in first place. The same reverence for past authorities,
once again going back past Zarlino, is probably the root of Fux’s choice

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 57 ===

to publish Gradus in Latin—the last major practical music theory treatise
to appear in that language. In homage to the Latin language and to the
creative process, Fux borrowed his title from a 1688 poetical thesaurus of
Latin synonyms, epithets, and poetical phrases by Paul Aler that appeared
under this title in numerous prints from 1688 through the twentieth
century.

One of the fundamental changes taking place in eighteenth-century
thought concerned the status of innovations. For the new spirits of the
Enlightenment, innovativeness was a positive trait, an opportunity to
sweep out ideas that reasoned examination no longer found useful. Fux
would have nothing to do with this notion. He held onto the older attitude
toward innovation: it was something to be wary of and to be measured
against the standard of ancient authority.

Theorists and teachers in the eighteenth century, despite their admiration
for Gradus, did not hesitate to emend Fux’s approach in substantial ways.
Mizler, in his 1742 German translation, was faithful to Fux’s text but
added numerous annotations to make the work more relevant to modern
styles. He explained that it was more important to know major-minor
keys than the modes, remarked on the inadequacy of Fux’s discussion of
triads, and commented on numerous issues of voice leading. Later writers
and teachers concerned with species counterpoint and the stile antico—
including such figures as Martini, Mozart, Albrechtsberger, and Bee-
thoven—made much more fundamental changes, insisting on chordal
rather than intervallic explanations for voice interactions, viewing even
two-part counterpoints as the representations of complete chords, and
treating the resulting chords in terms of the harmonic progressions they
created. As a result, even though much lip service was paid to Gradus and
the species methodology was maintained, musicians during the second half
of the century did not view many crucial issues as Fux himself did and
certainly did not perceive Fuxian species counterpoint as presenting some
sort of true musical essence untainted by chord-to-chord harmonic
theories.

There is a telling difference in emphasis between Fux’s preface and
Mizler’s preface to the German translation—a difference that highlights
the divergence between Fux’s intentions and the use to which later gen-
erations of eighteenth-century musicians used his work. Fux makes it clear
he has written of the eternal bases of music in large part because of “the
unrestrained insanity” of contemporary music (Mann 196 5a, p. 17). Mi-
zler, by contrast, stresses that Fux erects his pedagogy on the basis of the
stile antico so that one studying his book will have “such a firm foundation
that he can build upon it whatever he wishes” (p. 3)—presumably even
“unrestrained [but firmly based!] insanity.”

Species Counterpoint and Fux’s Gradus

47


=== PAGE 58 ===

48

SOME MODERN ASSESSMENTS OF GRADUS

The role played by Gradus in its own era, later in the eighteenth century,
and in later periods has been a subject of much debate. One thing is
clear—that in any assessment of Fux’s intentions, judgment should be
based on the entire treatise. Although many readers may have used it
primarily as a treatise on species counterpoint or on fugue, Fux clearly
thought of Gradus as a comprehensive work designed to educate students
through carefully graded exercises and higher-level discussions until they
were capable of composing music, not merely writing counterpoint exer-
cises (Federhofer 1962, p. 113; Wollenberg 1970).

Riemann’s characterization of Gradus as out of date before it was
published (Riemann 1898, p. 415) and similar sentiments expressed by
others (Benary 1961, p. 80; Feil 1957) likewise ignore the richness of
seventeenth-century theory and the coexistence of a variety of musical
styles in the early eighteenth century. Certainly the value that eighteenth-
century musicians (as well as later generations) found in the work is
evidence enough that it was far more timely than many more supposedly
up-to-date treatises that have been long forgotten. It is a document of its
own era, as well as a testament to eternal verities. It is neither a work that
explains many aspects of contemporaneous music, nor one that deals with
structural counterpoint. Rather, it is a thoughtful and pedagogically sound
early-eighteenth-century text in the prima pratica, displaying much of the
musical knowledge accumulated by that tradition over nearly two
centuries.

If Fux had not been so taken with tradition, it is probable that he never
would have undertaken a work such as Gradus and that we might know
another treatise (perhaps Bononcini 1673?) as the classic that taught the
eighteenth century about the stile antico. However enjoyable it may be to
imagine the ways music in the eighteenth century might have differed
without a work like Gradus as an influence, such an exercise is ultimately
idle speculation. The work is no anomaly, but the summation of a cen-
turies-long musical and pedagogical tradition.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 59 ===

ep yt oe fe

BAHU?

Thoroughbass Methods

Thoroughbass is the beginning of composing; indeed, it may be called
an extemporaneous composition.
J. S. Bach (Spitta 1889, Vol. 2, p. 917)

AMID THE HEATED POLEMIC over prima pratica and seconda pratica,
musicians around 1600 could hardly have realized that one apparently
minor innovation of the time—an abbreviated musical notation—would
be the age’s most long-lived technical legacy. Features loudly touted to
support the seconda pratica were soon softened: persistent monody gave
way to more diverse musical textures, and extreme dissonances came to
be seen as variants of prima pratica voice leading. But basso continuo
transcended the stylistic split, since it acknowledged the bass as determi-
nant of harmony and voice leading in all new music. In fact, the term was
first applied in print not to music of the seconda pratica but to ecclesiastical
music close to the prima pratica in its treatment of dissonance and chro-
maticism (Viadana 1602). In Viadana’s collection, the basso seguente (an
organ part duplicating the lowest sounding part) became an independent
bass part in which occasional accidentals (but no numerals) help indicate
the chords to be played. Basses with numerals first appeared around the
same time in seconda pratica monodies.

Thoroughbass,! more than a mere notational innovation, confirms the

1. Of the various English terms, the most useful to this study is thoroughbass, a trans-
lation of basso continuo and akin to the German Generalbass (with or without a hyphen)
as used in Praetorius 1619 and Albert 1643. Locke 1673, the earliest English publication
on the subject, used Continued-Bass, a locution that did not survive. Through Bass occurs
in a manuscript treatise by John Blow (1649-1708) that may actually antedate Locke
(Arnold 1931, p. 163). Figured bass, as a generic term for the practice and its theory (as in
Shirlaw 1917), omits by definition the study of basses without figures, one of the most
theoretically interesting portions of this literature.


=== PAGE 60 ===

50

change from the tenor-oriented intervallic polyphony of an earlier era to
the bass-oriented chordal voice leading of later periods. As with all such
momentous changes in perspective, it was not a change wrought overnight.
By the mid-sixteenth century, growing awareness of the importance of the
bass led Zarlino to write about major-minor and multivoiced harmonic
entities. By the first decade of the seventeenth century, several theorists
adopted a chordal perspective on musical structure. And by the last decade
of the seventeenth century, the change to bass-oriented thinking was so
engrained that it erased memory of any earlier practices. Thus, in 1694,
when Henry Purcell (1659-1695) explained that “Modern Authors Com-
pose to the Treble when they make Counterpoint or Basses to Tunes or
Songs,” he contrasted this with the only older practice he knew: “Formerly
they used to Compose from the Bass” (Purcell 1694, p. 151).

The existence of compositions for which a performer had to furnish
harmonies and voice leadings above a bass necessitated a new species of
text—the thoroughbass manual. Scores of such publications and reprints
appeared in a remarkable variety of formats and approaches from the
earliest years of the seventeenth century into the early nineteenth century,
complemented by an even greater number of manuscript methods. They
range in length from a single broadsheet (Bianciardi 1607) to 960 pages
(Heinichen 1728); they appeared in collections of published music (Via-
dana 1602, Albert 1643, Telemann 1730), as part of composition treatises
(Ebner 1653, Penna 1684), as the second part of keyboard treatises (St.
Lambert 1707, Bach 1762, Tiirk 1791), and as independent publications.
They were written by major composers like Frangois Couperin (1668—
1733), Georg Philipp Telemann (1681-1767), and C. P. E. Bach (1714-
1788), as well as by authors whose names survive only through their
treatises (St. Lambert).

Their contents vary enormously. Some works are merely concerned with
the mechanics of figures and how to realize them (Couperin undated,
Mattheson 1735) or concentrate on transposition (Treiber 1704), while
others apply thoroughbass to composition (Niedt 1706, Heinichen 1728).
Some works are primarily for beginners or amateurs, while others are so
encyclopedic they probably daunted many an experienced practitioner
(Heinichen 1728, Bach 1762). Some treatises are not based on any single
system of harmony, while other works, especially those from after the
middle of the eighteenth century, are organized according to Rameauian
harmonic theories (Daube 1756, Tiirk 1791).

Thoroughbass practices varied from generation to generation and from
place to place. Differences include the harmonies intended by a given
notation, the rigor of voice-leading strictures, the freedoms accorded the
performer, the recommended figurings, the types of dissonances to be used,
and so forth. Some differences between treatises reflect the age and cir-

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 61 ===

cumstances of the theorists. In 1698, Andreas Werckmeister (1645-1706),
a church organist and composer, was primarily interested in German
sacred music of the late seventeenth century, while just thirteen years later
the much younger Johann David Heinichen (1683-1729) drew on his
experience with operas in Hamburg and Dresden in the early years of the
eighteenth century; C. P. E. Bach based his 1762 treatise on the Galant
style of the midcentury. Other differences reflect personal tastes.

Modern scholarship on thoroughbass has concentrated on realizations
performed on keyboard instruments. But throughout Europe, plucked
string instruments (lute, theorbo, and even harp) and strummed string
instruments (guitar) were commonly used in thoroughbass realizations.
More portable than keyboard instruments, plucked and strummed instru-
ments were widely used to accompany soloists and small ensembles. Many
treatises on thoroughbass were written by players of plucked and
strummed instruments or deal with such instruments, including Delair
1690, with extensive directions for unfigured basses; two manuscript trea-
tises from Salzburg around 1700 with “tiorba” realizations (discussed in
Kohlschiitter 1978); Campion 1716, containing the complete régle de
Voctave for the first time; Baron 1727, by a musician prominent in the
Berlin circle at midcentury; Kellner 1732, which was reprinted through
1796 and was translated from its original German into Swedish, Dutch,
and Russian, and Daube 1756, applying Rameauian harmonic theories to
thoroughbass.

Thoroughbass realization on plucked and strummed instruments brings
to the fore various issues that are less prominent on keyboard instruments.
Most important, voicing of chords on a fingerboard is often much more
restricted by the nature of the instrument than on a keyboard. Standard
fingerboard positions for some harmonies gave rise to what we would call
an inversion, known then as a renversement. Treatises from the early
seventeenth century acknowledged these standard positions via Alfabeto
notation instead of thoroughbass figures: any of a variety of lists of chords
for strummed instruments (especially guitar) in which letters were assigned
arbitrarily to chords and a performer simply applied the standard chord
position whenever a given letter appeared (surveyed in Christensen 1992<).
Alfabeto notation strengthened the notion inherent in any thoroughbass
method that each harmony is a discrete vertical unit.

A major factor differentiating treatises written before the middle of the
eighteenth century from later works concerns how closely a thoroughbass
realization should reflect the features of a polished composition. Seven-
teenth-century and early-eighteenth-century manuals, reflecting everyday
experience, were generally more understanding of lapses in voice leading
such as consecutive fifths and octaves, skips by augmented intervals, poorly
resolved dissonances (Arnold 1931, pp. 248-249, 252-253, 281-283,

Thoroughbass Methods

51


=== PAGE 62 ===

52

passim), or the degree to which a performer could play a chord other than
the one indicated “so long as the thoroughbass player does not play
conflicting chords that cannot stand together with the chords of the work
in question” (Heinichen 1728, pp. 731-732). Concerning parallel octaves,
Rameau, who recognizes the importance of their avoidance in a written
composition where “a composer can vary at leisure all the parts of a
harmony to his liking,” frankly states that in keyboard accompaniment
they “are perceptible only to musicians who have been warned about this
point, and even then the musicians’ ear is usually struck by them only
after their eyes have told them about them” (Rameau 1732, pp. 60—61;
Hayes 1974, pp. 87-88). By contrast, later treatises, notably Bach 1762,
apply to improvised accompaniments the voice-leading standards that hold
for finished compositions, probably reflecting the gradual disappearance
of extempore thoroughbass realizations.

In sum, there is no single School of Thoroughbass. Thoroughbass was
not tied to any instrumentation, style of music, style of performance, or
specific approach to theory. Nevertheless, despite their diversity and the
fact that they were designed primarily to inform performers how to read
the various symbols used to figure basses and how to deal with basses
where the figuring was incomplete, erroneous, or lacking altogether, tho-
roughbass methods reveal much about attitudes toward composition from
the way they give instructions, from the way they explain various voice
leadings and harmonic structures, from what they include, and from what
they omit. In all thoroughbass methods, the bass is the foundation of
harmony and chords are discrete vertical units that follow one another.
All thoroughbass methods promoted an attitude in which improvisation
was central, in which less attention was paid than in contrapuntal methods
to the rhythmic independence of voices and the contour and integrity of
the highest voice in the texture, and in which pitches not included in
thoroughbass figures (especially melodic passing tones, neighbors, and
arpeggiations) were not deemed essential to the harmony. Such topics, not
performance directions, are the focus here.

Among the many treatises, four are central to this chapter. Heinichen’s
960-page Der General-Bass in der Composition (Dresden, 1728) is the
most encyclopedic and informative thoroughbass manual of the age. The
second part of the Musicalische Handleitung (Hamburg, 1706) by Fride-
rich Erhard Niedt (c. 1674-1708) details more fully than any other work
how thoroughbass leads to composition. The brief Traité d’accompagne-
ment et de composition (Paris, 1716) by Francois Campion (c. 1686—
1748) treats the relationship between harmony and the expression of a
key. And the second part of the Versuch tiber die wabre Art das Clavier
zu spielen (Berlin, 1762) by C. P. E. Bach is an authoritative work by a
major composer of the middle and late century.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 63 ===

Chords

Thoroughbass writers dealt with harmonies as units built above the bass.
By abandoning the earlier tenor orientation and by viewing harmonies as
units instead of as combinations of intervals, they came closer to the
modern perspective of a chord with rearrangeable, octave-equivalent mem-
bers. But many differences, both obvious and subtle, remained. In classi-
fying the various chords arising from thoroughbass signatures, many writ-
ers dealt first with what we call root-position triads, then other consonant
chords, and lastly with dissonant chords, which is the order followed here.

THE TRIAD

Thoroughbass writers, following Zarlino and others in the late sixteenth
century, recognized a fifth and third over the bass as the normal harmony.
It was the only chord whose presence was routinely indicated by the
absence of figures, although it could require an indication if it included a
note not found in the key signature or if there were several harmonies
over one bass note (Delair 1690, p. 23, offers six ways to indicate a triad).
Most thoroughbass writers endow it with a special name: the harmonic
triad (trias harmonica in Niedt 1700), the perfect chord (l’accord parfait
in Couperin), the common chord (comon corde in Blow c. 1670?, concen-
tus ordinarius in Muffat 1699, Ordinar-Satz or Ordinar-Griff in Werck-
meister 1702, ordinair Accord in Heinichen 1728), and, with Mattheson’s
characteristic bombast, the “perfect, fully consonant, harmonic triad or
chord” (1735).

Since good voice leading could mandate different right-hand positions,
thoroughbass writers urged performers to practice the triad in the right
hand with any of its notes on top. Mattheson 1735 refers to these voicings
of what we call the root position triad as the “three positions of the
chord” (drey Ordnungen der Accorde) while Heinichen 1728 calls them
the “three principal chords” (drey Haupt-Accorde). Werckmeister 1702
bestows three different names on what we call root-position triads: Or-
dinar-Satze for triads with the right hand in close position, zerstreuten
(dispersed) Ordinar-Sdatze for triads with the right hand in open position,
and Extraordinar-Satze for open-position chords doubling the third or
fifth (pp. 3-5). Such terminology indicates both a change from a sixteenth-
century perspective and lingering aspects of that perspective: any chord
was now an entity that could appear in any arrangement over the bass,
but different names for different voicings still implied that these different
voicings were separate entities, not different forms of one entity.

Theorists differed over the relationship between triads and other har-
monies. Earlier writers simply stated that all chords not 8/5/3 required
figures because they were “special chords” or “exceptions” (sonderbahren

Thoroughbass Methods

53


=== PAGE 64 ===

54

Sdtze or exceptiones, Werckmeister 1702, pp. 8-9). J. S. Bach, in the
Clavierbtichlein fiir Anna Magdalena Bach, likewise differentiates “true”
(eigenthiimlich) chords or 8/5/3 from all other chords, which are “bor-
rowed” (entlehnet). The assumption that 8, 5, and 3 are the standard
intervals above a given bass note even led the author of a popular manual
on singing, playing “all sorts of instruments,” realizing a thoroughbass,
and composing instrumental and vocal music to list sixths among the
dissonances (Speer 1697, p. 180).

Many eighteenth-century writers, showing a greater awareness of the
placement of different types of harmonies on different scale degrees, re-
jected this dichotomy, arguing that the proper chord above most notes of
the scale was something other than a simple triad. For instance, Lorenz
Mizler (1711-1778) criticized the 1715 edition of Werckmeister 1698,
arguing that in C major, D should carry a 6/4/3 chord, E a 6/3/8 or 6/3/6
chord, and so forth—these should not be thought of as exceptions but as
the regular chords for those degrees (Mizler 1736-1754, Vol. 2, pp. 50—
51). This is the same issue that Fux had grappled with in his discussion
of triads in Gradus. This way of thinking about harmony and key structure
was promoted by the régle de l’octave and other ways of dealing with
unfigured basses (discussed later in this chapter), thereby preparing the
way for many of Rameau’s ideas about the proper placement of harmonies
within a key.

OTHER CONSONANT CHORDS
After discussing triads, thoroughbass writers generally turned to the other
consonant chord, 6/3. Some theorists, echoing Zarlino’s perspective, ex-
plained that in a 6/3 chord “instead of the fifth there is a sixth” (Muffat
1699, p. 41). Other writers simply listed the notes of a 6/3 chord, giving
no explanation of its origin or relation to other chord types (Gasparini
1708, Chapter 2).

Many writers, though, related the 6/3 chord to the 5/3 triad. Sometimes
such explanations do not imply understanding of triadic inversions, as in
Keller 1717: “A Common Cord to any note makes third Sixth & Eighth
to ye third above it or sixth below it, A Common Cord makes a fourth
sixth & Eighth to ye fifth above it or fourth below it” (p. 7). As suggestive
as this remark is, it is clear from what follows immediately that Keller
does not intend an inversional or functional relationship between the
chords; he is simply offering a mnemonic device to relate different figurings
that yield the same notes in the right hand: “A Common Cord makes a
third fifth & seventh to the sixth above it or third below it, A Common
Cord makes fourth sixth & second to the seventh above it or second below
it” (see Example 3-1). Surely, a C-major triad is not the origin of an A-
minor seventh chord. Many writers utilized such mnemonic methods,

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 65 ===

BK acrce

Example 3-1. Keller 1717, p. 7

whether by listing different figurings that yield the same right-hand pat-
terns (Delair 1690, St. Lambert 1707, Hesse 1776) or by stating that 6/3
chords have the same notes as 5/3 triads a third lower (Bach 1762, Chapter
3; Mitchell 1949, p. 209).

Other writers, both before and after Rameau’s Traité of 1722, explicitly
recognize the 6/3 chord as a triadic inversion. Werckmeister 1702, for
instance, explains a C#/E/A chord by noting that “A must truly be the root
[Wurtzel] of this chord.” Hence doubling the C# would be bad “because
these two C#s would stabilize the bass [das Fundament stabiliren], which
is not the proper root of this chord . . . Thus whenever a sixth stands
above a note, the lower third is assumed below it [profunda mento ge-
setzet]” (p. 76). Wurtzel is probably a translation of the Latin radix for
the root of an interval or triad in Lippius 1610 (fol. B3”).

Heinichen 1728 similarly discusses how inversion (Verkehrung) explains
both the origin and the common doubling of a 6/3 chord (pp. 140-141).
Here it is likely, though not provable, that the explanation derives from
Rameau’s Traité (1722), not from the Lippius tradition reflected in Werck-
meister. First, there is no comparable discussion in Heinichen’s earlier
thoroughbass treatise of 1711. Second, Heinichen’s discussion is close to
Rameau’s terminology, referring like Rameau to inversion but not to chord
roots. Third, Heinichen discusses inversions of seventh chords (which no
theorist before Rameau did) in a passage where he seems to be explaining
the notion of inversion as something new to himself as well as to his
reader, feeling his way among the terms “rearrange” (verwechseln), “in-
vert” (verkebren), and “exchange” (vertauschen) and not entirely sure
whether the result is “an entirely new chord” or “a rearrangement of the
previous harmony”:

Before we ask how one can rearrange the harmony before the resolution of
a dissonance, we must first know what a rearrangement of the harmony
really is . . . [I]n the general sense, it is nothing other than an inversion or
rearrangement of the notes so that some are placed below and others above
. .. Since musical harmony is changed only a bit if only the upper voices are
exchanged while the bass remains, so more specifically or in its true meaning
a real rearrangement of the harmony only occurs where the bass-note or the
basis itself is rearranged and exchanged with the other notes so that an

Thoroughbass Methods

55


=== PAGE 66 ===

56

entirely new chord and harmony arises, which one can therefore properly
call a rearrangement of the previous harmony, because just those preceding
notes are repeated in a changed ordering. (pp. 622-623)

Finally, the placement of these tenets within Heinichen 1728 suggests that
they were late additions to the text. The earlier portions of the treatise,
which do not mention Rameau or Rameauian ideas in the body of the
text, were set in type for as long as six years prior to publication (Heinichen
1728, p. 938). Explicit references to Rameau occur late in the treatise
(pp. 763-766 and in the addenda on pp. 948 and 960). The discussion of
inverted seventh chords occurs in the body of the text rather late in the
treatise. But the inversional explanation of the triad occurs in a footnote
running under pp. 140-143, attached to the traditional rule on what to
double in a 6/3 chord. Footnotes were commonly used to insert informa-
tion to a text already set in type, implying that the footnote might have
been added after Heinichen had read Rameau’s Traité. In the Vorrede to
his 1728 work, Heinichen notes that among the changes he made to his
1711 treatise was the incorporation of hitherto unknown materials from
German, Italian, and French authors (fol. f’); decades later, Marpurg cited
this very statement as proof that Heinichen learned chord inversions from
Rameau (Marpurg 1776, pp. 271-272).

In sum, it is difficult to gauge knowledge of triadic inversions. Writers
of fingerboard thoroughbass manuals talked of renversements and the
conservative church musician Werckmeister freely talked about chord
roots, while Heinichen, active in the latest operatic styles, seemingly
learned inversions from Rameau.

OTHER CHORDS OF THE SIXTH
Thoroughbass was supposed to allow a performer to see a figure and play
a chord. As pointed out by William Mitchell, a theory of harmony hampers
this process by requiring a performer to translate the thoroughbass symbol
into an abstract harmony and then retranslate that harmony into the notes
to be played (Mitchell 1949, p. 18). But the situation was not as simple
and straightforward as Mitchell and others imply. Even in the relatively
simple category of 6-chords, a performer had to analyze the context to
decide which rules applied to a given 6 in the bass.

Part of the reason for this complexity was that eighteenth-century writ-
ers included under chords of the sixth all the harmonies that might be
intended when only 6 appears in the figures, not merely the first inversion
of triads that modern musicians mean when they refer to 6-chords. Some
writers subdivided what modern theory treats as a single harmony and
also added different harmonies, all within the same category. Couperin,
for instance, lists four types of 6-chords: 8/6/3, 3/6/3, 6/3, and 6/4/3. We

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 67 ===

gt pda! =
rs fe s

6 5 ‘
Example 3-2. Bach 1762, Chapter 3; Mitchell 1949, Figs. 255c¢, 260a

might regard the first three as different doublings of the same chord type,
and the last as a separate chord. But for Couperin, each category was a
separate harmony indicated by 6.

Other writers, such as C. P. E. Bach, include quite a few different
categories of chords under the rubric of 6-chords: what we call first-
inversion major, minor, diminished, and augmented triads; augmented-
sixth chords; and various 8/6 or 6/3 simultaneities arising from nonhar-
monic tones. In each of these diverse chord types, different rules determine
which notes are to be played, which notes can be doubled, and how the
voice leading is to be arranged. Bach follows standard practice in recom-
mending that as a rule the third or sixth over the bass be doubled in a
sixth chord, and that the octave of the bass be omitted. This makes good
sense when the sixth chord represents what we would call an inverted
triad, especially when the bass is scale-step 3 or 7. When the sixth chord
is built on scale-step 2, however, the sixth above the bass is the leading
tone and cannot be doubled, and the bass may be doubled. For other sixth
chords, new rules are needed for almost every example, as is shown in
Example 3-2. For the first case, Bach recommends adding a fourth; for
the second, he recommends doubling the bass. As it turns out, in both
cases the fourth voice he recommends can be construed as the root of the
chord. But since he does not discuss simultaneities in terms of roots, that
mode of explanation is closed to him.

He then discusses 8/6 chords where the 8 or 6 is diminished (see Example
3-3). Once again, the harmony does not result from a first-inversion triad,
the sixth cannot be doubled, and new rules are needed.

Another source of problems was the relationship between 6/3 and 6/4/3
chords. On scale-degree 2, 6 could be realized as a 6/3 or a 6/4/3 chord,
whereas on scale-degree 3 or 7, 6/4/3 was not plausible when 6 alone was

tia > dtd
a eeeeLLias

Example 3-3. Bach 1762, Chapter 3; Mitchell 1949, Figs. 257[b], 259

Thoroughbass Methods

57


=== PAGE 68 ===

58

: fz fz
= =o E f f
2 o 4 o 6 $4 oF 6 s— 6 5 6 4
2 4 44 2-3 4 55 2
2 2 2 3
Example 3-4.

indicated. Since 6 sometimes implies either 6/3 or 6/4/3, many thorough-
bass writers discuss 6/4/3 chords along with 6 chords. By contrast, C. P.
E. Bach, despite his supposed antipathy to chord-inversion theory, reflects
that theory by discussing 6/4/3 chords along with 6/4 chords (Chapter 6;
Mitchell 1949, p. 229). He acknowledges that a 6/4/3 chord is sometimes
intended when only 6 appears in the figuring (Chapter 7; Mitchell 1949,
p. 234) and allows the fourth of a 6/4/3 chord to be omitted in a three-
part accompaniment, but he does not point out the similarity between 6/3
and 6/4/3 chords (ibid.; Mitchell 1949, p. 235).

DISSONANT CHORDS

Most theorists tried to impose some rational order on dissonant chords.
Heinichen 1728, for instance, begins with those dissonant chords having
2 in the signature or implying 2 (2, 5/2, 4/2, 5/4/2, 6/4/2, #4, 6/#4/2), those
having 3 (6/4/3, 6/4#4/3), then 4, and so forth through 9. Among the “2”
chords are what we recognize as the third inversion of a seventh chord
(variously labeled 2, 4/2, 6/4/2, #4, and 64/2), a first-inversion triad with
bass suspension (5/2), a first-inversion seventh chord with bass suspension
(5/4/2), and a root-position triad with a bass suspension (4/2) (see Example
3-4).

St. Lambert 1707 also orders dissonant chords numerically, but in a
different manner: first all chords having only one number in the signature,
then those with two numbers in the signature, those with three, and finally
those indicated by numerals in succession, such as 6—5 or 9-8.

Writers from later in the century often departed from these numerical
orderings and categorized dissonances according the newer harmonic the-
ories, whether or not they were supporters of that theory. C. P. E. Bach,
for instance, although he scrupulously avoids explicit discussions of Ra-
meau-like chordal theories, nevertheless orders his chapters according to
that theory: triads and 6/3 chords (including, as noted, many dissonant
combinations), then dissonant triads (diminished and augmented), the
dissonant 6/4 inversion of the triad, inversions of seventh chords (6/4/3,

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 69 ===

6/5/3, 6/4/2), and then the remaining signatures, most of which (except
the root-position seventh chord) result from one or more notes added to
a triad or seventh chord. By the end of the century, the ordering of chords
was closely tied to harmonic theory, as in Tiirk 1791, which treats the
consonant triad and its inversions (5/3, 6/3, and 6/4 positions), the dis-
sonant triads (diminished and augmented), seventh chords (7, 6/5, 4/3,
and 2), ninth chords, eleventh chords, and then the addition of from one
to four added notes in each of these categories in turn. In all these clas-
sification systems except that of Tiirk, chords of widely divergent harmonic
functions are frequently discussed together and chords of quite similar
function appear far apart, sometimes arising twice in different locations,
with the types of problems just discussed in connection with chords of the
sixth.

Changing keys could obscure parallel harmonic functions by requiring
different figurings for the functionally equivalent harmony. For instance,
in a piece in A major, a dominant seventh chord required only 7. But if
the piece moved to E major or A minor, the equivalent dominant seventh
required 7. This was further complicated because various usages, espe-
cially doublings, were codified by many writers in terms of the key sig-
nature. For instance, a common rule stated that a bass note raised by a
sharp should not be doubled. In most cases, this rule prohibited doubled
and vi” in a major key). But the rule was not infallible. If a composition
began in C major and moved to E minor, the rule implied that an F4 in
the bass supporting an Fk-A-D# chord should not be doubled, while in
any other key closely related to C major (D minor, F major, G major, and
A minor, for instance) the bass would normally be doubled in a “vii?”
chord.

Additional complications arose from the fact that signatures with one
flat or sharp too few were common well into the eighteenth century.
Campion 1716 presents the régle de l’octave for the minor mode with a
Dorian signature. The body of the text in Rameau’s 1722 Traité also uses
Dorian as the model for minor (although the Supplement and all his later
treatises use Aeolian). J. S. Bach’s Sonata in g for violin solo (BWV 1001),
also dating from the 1720s, uses a one-flat signature for the movements
in G and in Bb, resulting in Dorian and Lydian signatures. These signatures
were maintained partly by habit and partly to minimize the clutter of
accidentals in the signature, especially since musicians did not yet agree
on the ordering of accidentals or even whether to notate them in one or
two octaves in the signature. Abbreviated key signatures appeared even
into the early nineteenth century: Beethoven used only six flats in the Ab-
minor Klagender Gesang of his opus 110 Piano Sonata (1821).

Thoroughbass Methods

59


=== PAGE 70 ===

60

PEDAGOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

Musicians of the time were well aware of the complexities cited above.
Decade by decade, the number of thoroughbass signatures increased, com-
pounding the problems. Although some seventeenth-century manuals in-
clude fewer than a dozen signatures, Heinichen 1728 lists 32 “common
signatures” (up from 12 in Heinichen 1711); Rameau 1726 lists 62 sig-
natures for 30 different chords; Mattheson 1735, intending characteristi-
cally to include “all the known” signatures, lists 70, yet omits 6 found in
Heinichen; and Rousseau 1768 lists 120 signatures. As a result, compre-
hensive thoroughbass methods often contain huge numbers of chordal
types, a range of contexts into which each of these types fit, and numerous
rules and exceptions. There was a continual stream of new thoroughbass
manuals, each promising fewer and easier rules than its predecessors.

Another approach was to do away with explicit rules altogether and
instead offer paradigmatic progressions to be learned by rote. Handel’s
brief manuscript of thoroughbass lessons for Princess Anne (in Mann
1987, pp. 21-32) falls into this category: the first progressions contain
only 5/3 chords, later progressions add 6/3 chords, then various suspen-
sions and pedal points. The last exercises are partimento fugues—fugues
written on a single staff on which the opening statements of the subject
are indicated, followed by a figured bass over which fugal entries can be
introduced.

Jean-Francois Dandrieu (c. 1682-1738), “after Couperin and Rameau
... the most celebrated French harpsichord composer of the 18th century”
(Fuller 1980), published a popular method based on a similar approach
that remained in print from around 1719 into the 1760s. Dandrieu offers
a one-page plate for each of twenty-one chord types: the “perfect chord”
(8/5/3), the “simple sixth chord” (8/6/3), the “chord of the small sixth”
(6/4/3 on scale-step 2), and so on through “the diminished seventh.” The
brief text on each plate merely describes the chord, its location within a
key, and its common figuring. Each plate appears three times: first with
complete figuring (such as 8/5/3, 3/8/5, or 5/3/8 to show the proper voicing
of each triad), then with the common figuring (such as only 6 for 8/6/3
chords), and lastly with no figuring.

Other methods following this approach were based on the régle de
l’octave, an ascending and descending bass scale with a fixed harmony
over each scale degree. Many such methods, referred to collectively as
partimenti, were published throughout the eighteenth century, concen-
trated mostly in Italy but appearing to some extent in most regions of
Europe (discussed in Christensen 1992b). The pupil learned voice-leading
patterns that could be applied to realizing figured basses as well as to
improvising.

Some methods contain little explanatory text, making it difficult to

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 71 ===

assess the types of discussions that might have taken place between teacher
and student. It may well be that teachers who used these methods simply
stressed rote memorization of voice-leading patterns. Or it may be that
teachers adopting these methods commented on the exercises using the
language of more explanatory works. Whatever the case, writers of all
types of methods stressed how important it was to develop automatic
voice-leading habits from one figuring. Even Rameau, surely the most
verbal explainer of the century, repeatedly stresses in each of his accom-
paniment methods (published in 1722, 1732, and 1761) the need for the
fingers and hearing to develop ingrained habits: “knowledge, the ear, and
the fingers contribute equally to judging, feeling, and immediately execut-
ing a piece of music” (Rameau 1761, p. 24).

Dissonance Treatment

Because thoroughbass performers played right-hand chords along with
most bass notes on the beat, it was essential to avoid clashes between an
accented dissonant note somewhere in the texture and the simultaneous
resolution of that dissonance in the continuo. Hence, when thoroughbass
methods treat dissonances, they are primarily concerned with dissonances
played along with a bass note; it matters little whether they form what
we call chord sevenths, dissonant fourths in second-inversion chords, or
suspensions and appoggiaturas. All these dissonances were deemed part
of the chord and were to be indicated in the figures. Dissonances occurring
after the beat—passing tones, neighbors, anticipations, and the like—
would not create such articulated clashes and were generally ignored in
thoroughbass figures. They concerned melody, not harmony.

IDENTIFICATION OF DISSONANCES
In most dissonant chords, at least one dissonant note forms a second,
fourth, seventh, ninth, or an augmented or diminished interval clashing
with the bass, allowing easy identification of the dissonance via the tho-
roughbass figures. Often, a simple rule explained proper resolution of the
identified dissonance and appropriately coordinated motions in the other
voices.

Some dissonances required further elucidation. When the dissonance is
a step above the bass, either the upper voice must resolve (such as a D-C
suspension over a C in the bass), or the bass itself must resolve (such as
a bass C under a D-triad). A notational convention generally differentiates
these two situations: an upper-voice note that resolves is indicated by 9
(as in 9-8) and a bass note that must resolve is indicated by 2. Also, 2 is
preferred over bass pedals (Arnold 1931, pp. 674-675, 874-877). Delair
1690 expresses the convention in what seems an elliptical manner, but

Thoroughbass Methods

61


=== PAGE 72 ===

62

Example 3-5.

one that contains the required information: “when made on the first part
of a [bass] note it is called a ninth, when made on the second part of a
note it is called a second” (p. 24): a ninth is an upper-part dissonance,
hence prepared before a new bass note and appearing over the beginning
of a bass note; a bass suspension, chord seventh, or dissonant chord over
a bass pedal would occur only after the bass note has already been present,
hence 2 appears only as the second numeral over a bass note.

The use of 2 and 9 in figures is one of the last remnants of some
seventeenth-century practices that indicated intervals in more than one
octave. Penna 1684 still uses numbers as high as 22. Bach 1762 uses
numbers up to 12 to clarify certain voice leadings (Chapter 1; Mitchell
1949, p. 183), but fewer than a half-dozen times in the entire treatise.
Otherwise, thoroughbass figuring is universally octave-equivalent (Arnold
1931, pp. 35-65, 874-879).

Some combinations of intervals are dissonant yet contain only conso-
nances against the bass, such as a sixth with a fifth. Writers who did not
utilize a theory of seventh chords and their inversions explained that in a
6/5 chord “the fifth is treated as a dissonance” (Bach 1762, Chapter 8;
Mitchell 1949, p. 244). Gasparini 1708 offers a more general rule: upper
parts can be “linked with one another by dissonances of a second or
seventh. In relation to one another, they resolve regularly, but are always
consonant with the bass” (Chapter 7).

The issue was thornier with 4/3 chords. C. P. E. Bach notes “the
exceptional features of the chord are that the third is treated as a disso-
nance and the fourth enjoys more freedom than usual” (Chapter 7; Mitch-
ell 1949, p. 233). The third had to resolve downward, but the fourth
could either remain (Example 3-5a) or even ascend (Example 3-5b). Be-
cause of the different resolutions of the fourth, Heinichen regarded these
two usages as entirely separate harmonies even though both harmonies
had the same figuring (Arnold 1931, p. 262). Because the fourth in 4/3
chords did not have to be prepared in a preceding chord and did not
resolve by stepwise descent, it came to be known as the “irregular fourth”
(Muffat 1699, Heinichen 1728). Some theorists ban such unresolved
fourths altogether (Werckmeister 1698, p. 16). Systematic explanations of
6/5 or 4/3 chords were beyond thoroughbass methods.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 73 ===

Example 3-6. Bach 1762, Chapter 1 (Mitchell 1949, Fig. 206a)

THE STRUCTURAL FRAME FOR DISSONANCES
The resolution of one dissonance into another usually merited a special
discussion, as in Bach 1762, Chapter 1 (Mitchell 1949, pp. 192-193) (see
Example 3-6). Bach writes: “A moving bass often causes dissonances to
resolve to dissonances . . . Eventually, however, there must be a resolution
to a consonance. Such a relationship is called retardatio.” Bach means
that the fourth C over the first downbeat resolves to a second dissonance,
the tritone B, and that a consonant chord over the bass does not appear
until the 6 chord. This explanation fails to show how the B satisfactorily
resolves the C to the third of a G’ chord, a resolution that is simultaneous
with but conceptually separate from introduction of the F in the bass that
gives rise to the 4/2 chord. Rameau would have had little trouble explain-
ing the resolution in this manner. But even if Bach did not wish to invoke
Rameauian harmony here, he could have drawn on older approaches that
reduced complex voice leadings to their structural basis, as Bernhard had
done nearly a century earlier or as Heinichen had done in 1728.

Heinichen’s explanations appear in a long chapter devoted to disso-
nances in the theatrical style, the equivalent of Bernhard’s Stylus luxurians
(pp. 580—720, translated in Buelow 1962). In particular, he seems to be
answering those who appealed solely to the text to rationalize dissonances,
as Fux had done in his discussion of recitatives in Gradus (1725), or as
Sébastien de Brossard (165 5—1730) had done in his influential Dictionaire
de musique (1703; article “Settima”). Heinichen castigates “the ignorance
of those individuals . . . who accuse the stylus theatralis of observing no
rules and of dealing with dissonances and their beautiful resolutions with-
out a foundation” (p. 586). He repeatedly illustrates techniques by which
apparently improper dissonances resolve properly in some voice: arpeg-
giation before a suspension resolves, leaps to or from a dissonance pre-
pared or resolved in another part or within a single line that contains two
or more real parts, or anticipation or retardation of a dissonance, its
preparation, or its resolution.

In cases akin to Example 3-6, Heinichen demonstrates how a dissonance
moving to another dissonance can arise because

the bass, rather than remaining in place until the resolution of the dissonance

it carries and only then proceeding to the following dissonance, moves an-
ticipating this latter dissonance, thereby omitting all or a portion of the

Thoroughbass Methods

63


=== PAGE 74 ===

preceding note [see Example 3-7]. According to the old foundation, this
would be as [shown in Example 3-8].

Whereas Bach merely notes that one dissonance can follow another, Hein-
ichen shows how the first dissonance resolves along with the early ap-
pearance of the second one.

Because of the scope of the issues raised throughout this chapter, Hein-
ichen often deals with matters that are not so much a part of thoroughbass

Example 3-7. Heinichen 1728, p. 691

mts

6367

Example 3-8. Heinichen 1728, p. 692
J Boos: ==

= A
aj» |» =

Example 3-9. Heinichen 1728, pp. 613-616

64 Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 75 ===

Example 3-10. Heinichen 1728, pp. 603—604

as an extempore performance technique but rather a part of composition.
The excerpts in Example 3-9 dissect the polyphonic underpinning of a
single melodic line and show how dissonances that seem to disappear
without resolving (C over Fi in measure 1 and Bb over E in measure 4 in
the third excerpt) are prolonged via arpeggiation of a harmony until a
true resolution occurs.

Other passages demonstrate Heinichen’s secure understanding of the
origins of various commonly elided voice leadings. His explanations of
the origin of the cadential 6/4 and conchordal sevenths are exemplary (see
Example 3-10). Heinichen knew that other treatises he studied simply do
not explain these usages, often rationalizing them by the motto sic volo,
sic jubeo (“what I like, I command”). He was justifiably proud of his
achievements.

Thoroughbass and Composition

Although some musicians regarded thoroughbass solely as a performance
technique, others believed that thoroughbass played an important role in
the pedagogy of musical composition. J. S. Bach, in a 1727 letter, explains
that one of his students had studied “Clavier, Thorough Bass, and the
fundamental rules of composition based thereupon” (David and Mendel
1966, p. 111). C. P. E. Bach confirms that thoroughbass was the heart of
his father’s approach to composition: “His pupils had to begin their studies
by learning pure four-part thorough bass . . . He particularly insisted on
the writing out of the thorough bass in [four real] parts ... The realization
of a thorough bass and the introduction to chorales are without doubt
the best method of studying composition, as far as harmony is concerned”
(ibid., p. 279). Georg Philipp Telemann (1681-1767) explained that tho-

Thoroughbass Methods

65


=== PAGE 76 ===

66

roughbass led to improvising fantasies and then to free composition (Te-
lemann 1730, p. 185).

Title pages of numerous manuals from different countries and different
stylistic orientations acknowledge the common ground shared by tho-
roughbass and composition: Werckmeister, a German organist interested
in sacred music, links composing and extempore playing in 1702; Cam-
pion, a French theorbist, entitled his manual Treatise of Accompaniment
and Composition in 1716; and Heinichen, active in Italian opera in Ham-
burg and Dresden, entitled his encyclopedic work Thoroughbass in Com-
position. For these authors, thoroughbass and composition were fully
complementary: in order to play thoroughbass properly, one must under-
stand “composition or at least simple counterpoint”; and learning tho-
roughbass “teaches the student the foundation of composition” (Werck-
meister 1702, p. 67).

The path from learning thoroughbass to composing is described in many
sources. But the one thoroughbass writer who demonstrated more com-
pletely than any other how this was to be done is Niedt.2 The essence of
Niedt’s approach lies in adding variations to a straightforward thorough-
bass realization. In Part 2 of his Handleitung, Niedt illustrates dozens of
patterns to elaborate every ascending and descending interval from a
second to an octave (Chapter 2). In the following chapters, he applies
these elaborations to thoroughbass realizations, demonstrating how to
elaborate simple bass lines and then right-hand parts in a host of meters,
suggesting that still further elaborations are possible if permutations are
applied to patterns of notes. As the examples get more sophisticated, Niedt
even adds dynamics to some of them, suggesting echo effects of orchestral
writing. In the last of the dozen chapters, he uses elaborations of a single
bass to produce an entire partita of eleven dances.

The openings of some of these dances appear in Example 3-11. Niedt’s
diminutions encompass not only foreground embellishments such as added
passing tones, neighbors, and arpeggiations, but also interpolations on a
larger scale in the form of added harmonies. These harmonies are them-
selves capable of elaboration. Although comparison of the various diminu-
tions with the original thoroughbass may be suggestive of Schenkerian
structural levels, Niedt intended these possibilities as different foreground
realizations, not as analyses of one another.

Although no other work offers a path from thoroughbass to composition
as detailed as Niedt’s, other publications cover some of the same material.
Mattheson 1719, for instance, teaches thoroughbass via a number of “test
pieces” (Probestiicke). Because of the great variety of realizations that

2. Feil 1955 thoughtfully compares Niedt’s approach to composition to Riepel’s and
Koch’s later in the century.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 77 ===

Allemande It

Courante [1]

(Sarabande 1}

creerres

pp epe eee OT |

zJ) J J.
Meal

Hl
“

i)
jte

i

Minuet I}

lo

juror

Example 3-11. Niedt 1706, Chapter 12

Te 4

Mattheson illustrates, he in effect covers in a different fashion many of
the points that Niedt had included.

The contrasts between Niedt’s composition method adding diminution
techniques to a full-voiced harmonic structure and Fux’s composition
technique built from species counterpoint are quite sharp. Fux begins with
simple two-voice intervallic writing; Niedt begins with complete chords
and assumes that two-voice writing represents part of a full-voiced har-
monic texture. Fux disdains elaborative reworking of examples; such dim-

Thoroughbass Methods

4 2
4 ey ee yémilt fl —~FTI, ane

67


=== PAGE 78 ===

68

inutions form Niedt’s method. Apart from imitative counterpoint, Fux
avoids motivic repetitions; motivic repetition is a high priority for Niedt
in working with a given elaborative pattern in a bass or melody. In
addition, Niedt’s approach contrasts with that of Fux in general outlook.
Niedt, living in the Hanseatic League seaport of Hamburg, clearly felt the
influence of the heady ideas of British and French science and philosophy
promoting rational re-examination of traditions and a simplification of
education:

My true goal is this: just as a closer and easier path is found nowadays in
all sciences and arts, so likewise I have also endeavored to find an easy path
in thoroughbass by which to lead the beginner who wishes to learn. Without
doubt, our dear elders have broken the path and shown us the way up in
everything; but with so many digressions and tiresome labyrinths that one
had to spend a long time at it before the desired goal could be attained, and
most remained stuck in those labyrinths. (Niedt 1710, fol. A2‘)

By contrast, Fux disparaged innovations and pedagogical shortcuts.

Niedt’s definition of the very term counterpoint underscores the con-
trast between his thoroughbass approach and Fuxian counterpoint:
“Counterpoint is truly spelling in the musical alphabet from which I learn
to place the letters together and to make syllables from them. To state this
more clearly: when I wish to set a note, for example a C, and form a
complete harmony, t.e., a counterpoint, with it, then I spell as follows: C
is the foundation-key, E is the third, G is the fifth, C is the octave—I place
these letters above one another” (Niedt 1717, p. 2; emphasis added). This
meaning of counterpoint, denoting the formation of harmonies, existed
alongside the more traditional notion of counterpoint throughout the
eighteenth century.

Niedt was not alone in his espousal of a harmonic approach to com-
position via thoroughbass. Similarly rejecting the contrapuntal tradition,
Heinichen argued that “experience teaches that the greatest and most
passionate contrapuntists are in general the worst composers and also
most often the greatest pedants” (in Mattheson 1722, p. 357).3 These
sharp differences made the proponents of thoroughbass and contrapuntal
methods wary of each other through much of the eighteenth century. The
two traditions borrowed from each other, as when thoroughbass treatises
utilized Fux’s four rules of voice leading and when Fux discusses chordal
ideas. But the two traditions stood quite apart in underlying principles, in
pedagogical method, and in general philosophical outlook.

3. On the other hand, J. A. Hiller reports that on his deathbed Heinichen said he wished
he had composed a mass in the stile antico and a book on counterpoint (Hiller 1766-1770,
vol. 1, pp. 224-225).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 79 ===

Unfigured Basses

From the earliest days of thoroughbass, writers chastized composers and
copyists for providing bass parts without any figures to guide performers.
Despite perennial complaints, however, unfigured basses persisted right
through the eighteenth century. Indolence may partly account for this
situation. But it is hardly likely that unfigured basses would have existed
at all if bass parts by themselves did not suggest predictable harmonies.
The instructions many manuals give to assist performers with unfigured
basses provide us with invaluable insights into the thinking of seventeenth-
and eighteenth-century musicians on the nature of harmony and key.

Many writers simply ignore unfigured basses. Others explicitly decline
to discuss them, believing that even a vast number of rules would be
inadequate to cope with all the conceivable progressions (Bach 1762,
Chapter 35; Mitchell 1949, p. 180). But a fair number of manuals, the
most important being Penna 1684, St. Lambert 1707, Gasparini 1708,
Heinichen 1711 and 1728, and Campion 1716, tackle unfigured basses in
several different ways. Perhaps these writers realized that although unfig-
ured basses are an annoyance to performers, they are the normal state of
affairs for composers. After all, at some point in the process of composing
a piece, a composer has to decide what chords go with the bass part.

There were four methods for dealing with unfigured basses. Specific
chords might be placed over a given solmization syllable or an easily
identified note, such as a sharped note. Specific chords might be applied
to various patterns of bass intervals. Model bass lines with chords might
be learned by rote to be used whenever applicable. Or specific chords
might be placed over particular scale degrees. One or more approaches
appeared in different manuals.

The first method appears in print as early as Praetorius 1619 (p. 134;
p. 106 in the 1916 edition). Lorenzo Penna (1613-1693), among the
earliest to discuss unfigured basses extensively, formulates this approach
as his second and third rules of thoroughbass:

Rule 2: Each note of the bass is accompanied by thirds and fifths or their
compounds except for mi [the lower note of a semitone], which ordinarily
uses thirds and sixths or their compounds [see Example 3-12].

Rule 3: When the lower part has a sharp, it is generally to be accompanied
by the third and sixth [Penna 1684, pp. 146-147] [see Example 3-13].*

The content of these rules appears in all types of works into the early
eighteenth century—even in Fux’s exposition of triads.

4. Penna follows the practice begun in Viadana 1602 of notating accidentals in the staff
location of the note to be altered. This usage persisted at least through Martini [1756]
(p. 3).

Thoroughbass Methods

69


=== PAGE 80 ===

6

Ss 6 5 6 5

De 88 = t =|

P| eu

Example 3-12. Penna 1684, p. 147

A rationale for Penna’s rules seems obvious and can be stated without
recourse to later harmonic theories. When the bass is the leading tone, it
needs a sixth, since there is no perfect fifth over that scale degree. When
the bass is accidentally sharpened, it is generally the leading tone of the
following bass note. And when the bass is the third note of the scale, it is
frequently approached by step from either scale-step 2 or scale-step 4
supporting the leading tone; scale-step 3 must have a sixth so that the
leading tone in the preceding chord can resolve. The leading tone and
scale-step 3 in major keys fall on solmization syllable mi in the six-syllable
solmization still common in Italy and Italian-influenced areas at the time.

Although these reasons, which translate Penna’s rules to scale-step lo-
cations, may seem self-evident and are partly given in Heinichen 1728,
they might well have been unintelligible to Penna. First, Penna does not
discuss scales or scale steps. Second, his two rules cut across our categories.
We see a common factor in bass leading tones, whether diatonic or chro-
matic; but Penna explains that bass leading tones receive a sixth either
because they are mi or because they are sharped, not because they are
leading tones. Penna’s rule concerning mi explains both scale-steps 3 and
7, whereas our scale-step explanation gives different reasons for using
sixths above scale-steps 3 and 7. In brief, Penna’s rules are based on simple
and what are to us arbitrary features of the musical surface. Although the
rules frequently apply in major keys with few accidentals, theorists at the
time already noted that they did not apply to minor keys or where there
are many sharps: Speer 1697 notes the great variability in the placement
of sixth chords in minor keys (p. 182), and Werckmeister 1702 notes that

o4
a.

4
Ih
a8

poop}

oe

Example 3-13. Penna 1684, p. 147

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 81 ===

a ee eae

Example 3-14. Gasparini 1708, Chapter 4

placing a sixth-chord over sharps yields improper results in a piece built
on FH (p. 45). :

In addition to these rules, Penna also uses the second of the methods
listed above. He lists various types of bass patterns that suggest specific
figures: basses rising or falling by steps, thirds, fourths, and fifths. The
result is a plethora of rules.

St. Lambert 1707 and Gasparini 1708 likewise discuss many bass pat-
terns and the harmonies they imply. Gasparini lists many more possibilities
for each pattern than did Penna, probably reflecting the increasing prolif-
eration of voice-leading possibilities in the music of his generation. A bass
ascending by a semitone generally takes a minor sixth on the first note, as
shown in Example 3-14. But if the first chord has a major third above it,
it is the second harmony that requires a sixth, always major (as in “V-
iv®” in minor keys) (see Example 3-15). Gasparini then treats stepwise
basses. If three ascending notes begin a composition (or, presumably, a
phrase), the second note gets a major sixth, the third a natural sixth (as
in “I-vii°®-I®” in major or minor keys). But if the same bass occurs a step
higher, a natural sixth is required over the note that received a major sixth
earlier (see Example 3-16). Gasparini proceeds to four ascending notes
beginning on a downbeat, four ascending notes beginning with a rest, five
ascending notes, and so forth. St. Lambert deals with unfigured basses in
a similar fashion, introducing thirty-three separate rules.

IF Se

6 ‘ 6 6 ‘ 6 1 6

Example 3-15. Gasparini 1708, Chapter 4

2 ee re ee aeeeea ae

' 16 6 16 6
6 6 6 6

Example 3-16. Gasparini 1708, Chapter 4

Thoroughbass Methods


=== PAGE 82 ===

TON
MINEUR

; $$ :
Mice =— ===

72

Bure
Ean

TO] worse

any
tH
in

| worco

id
TT
HHS wat
R) eurce
Ht ae
1

Example 3-17. Francois Campion 1716. The bracketed intervals have been added
according to Campion’s explanation of each chord (p. 21).

Modern musicians nod in agreement with each of Gasparini’s and St.
Lambert’s recommendations, interpreting them (as Penna’s were inter-
preted above) in the light of later harmonic theories. But these writers did
not think in terms of modern scale-step explanations. In the absence of
such explanations, the number of rules and the possibilities to which they
applied must have been daunting, even for the most diligent student.

THE REGLE DE L’ OCTAVE

One way to get around these rules was to prescribe a given chord for each
degree in a major or minor scale. Such patterns were dubbed the régle de
Voctave by Campion, the French theorbist who in 1716 was the first to
publish complete bass octaves in this form. Campion ascribed their inven-
tion to his predecessor at L’Académie Royale de Musique, one M. de
Maltot, about whom absolutely nothing is known. Campion’s model scales
for major and minor are shown in Example 3-17. Although Campion was
the first to publish the scales as complete octaves, similar examples appear
in Gasparini 1708 and Heinichen 1711 (Example 3-18). Comparable pat-
terns, using less tonally oriented chord progressions, may be traced well
back into the seventeenth century (discussed in Brenet 1888; Mason 1981;
Christensen 1992a, 1992b).

In one crucial respect, the régle and the closely related patterns in
Heinichen and Gasparini signal a distinct change in focus from rules based
on solmization syllables or bass patterns apart from any scale. In the régle,
it is the scale-step status of each bass note that determines the harmony it
supports. There is a close agreement between the type of chord and the
scale degree: a root-position triad appears only over 1 and 5; a 6/4/3
chord appears over 2 and over 6 in major when descending; a 6/5/3 chord
with a consonant fifth appears only over 4 ascending; a 6/5/3 appears
only over the leading tone; and so forth. As a result, if the scale degree is
known, then the chord type is known, and if the chord type is known,
then the scale degree is known. Via these correspondences, the régle pro-
moted recognition of the manner in which harmony expresses a key.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 83 ===

Gasparini:

g ue" e—a =r fe i —o-
2 oe a ou —6- —
Ue 6 Ue ot Gh Gt
or6 2 or6
a =e
Ee et mere ss oO
ok 7 aS =
fo 6 + £ 6 F 48 6 16 6 te f
2
Heinichen, 1711:
C dur: 6 6
SS SS == oe
T
A moll: 6 6 '
3 ia
DEE a A E f

Example 3-18. Gasparini 1708, Chapter 8; Heinichen 1711, p. 201

The régle also hastened recognition that triads and seventh chords were
more fundamental than any other harmonies. Whereas thoroughbass
methods in general treated any figuring as a separate harmony, the régle,
by using only one chord per scale step, necessarily omitted what we today
would call chords with suspensions and appoggiaturas, leaving only triads,
seventh chords, and their inversions.

Since use of the régle was predicated on knowing the key, manuals
instructed performers how to recognize the key at each point in a piece.
Campion gives the common rule: look for a sharp; this lies one semitone
below the final of the key and is the “sensitive note” (notte sensible).
Other writers also called it the lower semitone (subsemitonium) or simply
the semitone of the mode (semitonium modi). Since knowledge of keys is
so important to using the régle, it is no accident that early eighteenth-
century thoroughbass manuals, including those that present the régle, are
among the earliest published sources to list most or all of the twenty-four
keys (Lester 1989, Chapter 6). Campion writes out his octaves in all
twenty-four keys. The need to know the proper notes of the scale and to
recognize locations within a scale in order to apply the régle and other
similar patterns was probably a major incentive in the rapid codification
and standardization of major and minor keys and key signatures early in
the eighteenth century.

In the sense that the régle presents the customary or normal placement
of chords within a key, the English cognate rule of the octave fails to give
régle de l’octave its due. In this term, the word régle implies both what is
customary or “regular” (cela est de régle) and what is arranged in order,
but not what is a rule in the sense of a regulation. German writers of the

Thoroughbass Methods

73


=== PAGE 84 ===

74

eighteenth century adopted a number of locutions close to this meaning:
“arrangement of the musical octaves” (Einrichtung der musicalischen Oc-
taven) in Walther 1732 (article on Campion), “ordering of an octave scale”
(Ordnung eine Octaven-Leiter) in Hahn 1751, “common bass scale” (all-
gemein Bassleiter) in Riepel 1786, and “common bass passage through an
octave” (allgemeine Octav Gang) in Albrechtsberger c. 1791. Padre Mar-
tini (1706-1784) calls it the “table for progressions” (Tavola per la mod-
ulazione; Martini 1774-1775, 2, p. xxxvii). An English term that carried
this meaning might be “the regularly ordered octave” in the sense of “the
regular or customary chords over an octave scale.” To avoid both the
misleading English term rule of the octave and a clumsy neologism, this
book always refers to the régle by its French name.

The régle appears in innumerable eighteenth-century writings. It pro-
vided a way of learning common chord successions, a way of dealing with
unfigured basses, and a basis for improvisation. Loéhlein 1765 and 1781,
an extremely popular keyboard, harmony, and accompaniment method
that appeared in numerous editions through 1848, devotes much space to
the régle in both volumes. C. P. E. Bach opens his discussion of improv-
isation with the simple form of the ascending régle, followed by numerous
realizations of increasing complexity with suspensions and chromatic tones
(Chapter 41; Mitchell 1949, pp. 431-433). The régle also made its way
into compositions: the descending bass scale that underlies the opening
portion of J. S. Bach’s Prelude in C major (Well-Tempered Clavier, 1) is
in effect the descending régle with interpolated harmonies.

CAMPION’S OTHER CHORDS

Despite its widespread use and general applicability, and despite Cam-
pion’s extravagant claim that “a piece is an assemblage of portions of
these octaves” (p. 8), the régle does not work in all circumstances. When
a bass proceeds by skips, many chords in the régle no longer apply. For
instance, a 6/4/3 chord on scale-step 2 is appropriate only when the bass
moves by step to 1 or 3. In addition, numerous commonly used signatures
are absent from the régle. To account for common chords missing from
the régle, Campion includes two additional progressions, one in major
and one in minor. As he does in the régle, Campion also relates these
chords to specific scale steps, confirming the growing recognition of the
relationship between harmonic structures and the expression of keys. Fol-
lowing each progression, there is an explanation of the notes in each chord
and its scale-step location, some of which are presented in Example 3-19.

1. [This chord] only occurs on the first [degree] of the minor key.

2. [This chord] ordinarily occurs on the first [degree] of the key, and is
almost always resolved to the semitone below.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 85 ===

3. [This note] carries the chord conforming to the seventh [degree].

5. [This chord] is placed on the final or dominant.

6. [This chord] is only found on the dominant of the major and minor key
and on the final of the major key.

12. Here we depart [from the key], since the tritone of D is Gt, which is the
leading tone in the scale [octave] of A... Here the tritone is accompanied
by the sixth and the minor third [above the bass]; ordinarily it is accom-
panied by the sixth and the second . . . [but when it has only #6 and b3]
the note that carries this chord is the ascending second degree of the
minor key.

13-14. Like the first chord [meaning that it is a triad and hence a tonic
chord].

15. The seventh of the key [du ton] descending.

16. To descend to the dominant, before the ordinary chord that is made on
the sixth [degree] of the key, one often finds the seventh . . . on the first
part of the note. On the second part of the note the usual chord indicated
in the octaves occurs. On this sixth [degree] of the key, the sixth [above
it] is naturally major. However, I have placed a sharp before it to raise
it, and this is called the augmented sixth; it is an extraordinary chord
. .. The D# that makes the augmented sixth is now in some sense the
leading tone of E, where the harmony ends extremely well.

26. [I]nstead of the sixth, one may employ the fifth. (Campion 1716, pp. 10—

15)

These examples, combined with the octaves, constitute a detailed catalog
of chord types and their scale-step locations. But although this approach
does provide significant insights into the relationship between harmonies
and the expression of keys, it is by no means a theory of harmony in the

al
a(n
i

A]

8 8 q 8 ' 7 8 6
46 5 8 46 4 46 5 '
4 8 8 4 43 3 43 4
- —s- 2? 2 -
f ==
1s 16 17 18 19 20 21 2 2B 24 25 26
_ |
#3 +
47

2 7 z 8 8

16 5 3 6 H 5

14 2 43 4 3 43

Example 3-19. Campion 1716, p. 10. Campion presents only the bass line
and figures; the realization has been added here.

Thoroughbass Methods


=== PAGE 86 ===

76

Example 3-20. Malcolm 1721, p. 429

Rameauian sense. Campion does recognize chordal inversions when he
notes that the guitar can be more suitable than theorbo for accompaniment
because on the guitar the chords need not be inverted (renversé; p. 19).
But it would have contradicted his whole approach to apply chord inver-
sions to the octaves or to his additional progressions. In his method, a
performer needs to relate only a chord type and a scale degree: 6/ 5/3
occurs only on the leading tone. If he had included inversions, the whole
procedure would have become much more complex, since 6/45/3 would
be an inverted 7/5/3 chord, which could appear on scale-step 2, 4, 5, or
7.
Just five years after Campion published his Traité, the Scottish musician
Alexander Malcolm (1685-1763) applied harmonic scale-step norms in a
rather different way, adding to them the notion of harmonic context as
the basis of “simple counterpoint” (Malcolm 1721, pp. 422-432). First,
he lists the possible intervals that can appear in a melody over each bass
scale step and then the possible bass scale steps that could harmonize a
given melodic scale step. For instance, scale-step 3 in the melody is almost
always supported by 1; scale-step 6 almost always by 4. Other scale steps
offer various choices.

To select the best interval for a given situation, Malcolm appeals to the
“great many common Places in point of Air, equally familiar to all Com-
posers, which necessarily produce correspondent common Places in Har-
mony” (p. 431). He illustrates common voice leadings, such as melodic
motions from scale-steps 3 to 1 and from 7 to 5, melodic phrases ending
on scale-steps 7 or 2, and the like, along with their common harmoniza-
tions. He urges the reader to find such norms in the works of Corelli.
Malcolm closes this discussion with one fully worked-out harmonization
and reasons for his choice of each note. His reasons are eclectic, touching
on the bass as a line, the contrapuntal interaction of bass and melody, and
structural imitation (see Example 3-20). The first note requires C because
the key is C. B or G would be possible for the second note:

But I rather chused the latter, because having begun pretty high with the

Bass, I foresaw I should want to get down to C below. [For the following
bass notes, I] chused to ascend gradually with the Bass, to preserve an

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 87 ===

Imitation that happens to be between the Parts, by the Bass ascending grad-
ually to the 5th f[undamental] [scale step] from the Beginning of the second
Bar, as the Treble does from the Beginning of the first Bar . . . As to the
following Notes of the Bass I need say nothing; for the Choice of them will
appear to be from one of these Two Considerations, either that they are the
only proper Bass Notes that the Treble could admit of, or that one is chosen
rather than another to favour the contrary Movement of the Parts. (pp. 429—
430)

This may not be a fully developed theory of melodic-harmonic structure.
But with its invocation of harmonic norms combined with well-considered
voice-leading recommendations and awareness of structural motives (the
hidden “imitation” between the melody and bass), it sounds strikingly
modern. It also stands almost alone in its time in demonstrating in detail
a possibly practical working method for a beginning composer. The only
other comparable discussion of the time is Henry Purcell’s explanation of
the harmonization of a melody (Purcell 1694, pp. 151-154).

The notion of harmonic norms is reflected not only in the gradually
evolving understanding of the relationship between harmony and the ex-
pression of a key, but also in the most commonplace explanations, such
as the criteria for determining the proper notes of a scale. In his 1703
Dictionaire, Brossard favors the form of the minor that we call harmonic
because using notes foreign to a given scale implies leaving the key: “It is
for this reason that the sixth and often even the augmented fifth are better
over the mediant of a mode [in the bass] than the perfect fifth, unless one
cadences there. For the same reason the major sixth is better than the
minor sixth over the note immediately above the final of minor modes,
and the minor third is better than the major third over the note immedi-
ately below the dominant of minor modes” (article Modo). By defending
a scale type in terms of harmonic norms, Brossard implicitly acknowledges
that mode or key is intimately connected with harmonic usages.

Scale-step norms also arise in simple terminology. In a discussion of
fugal subjects and answers, Werckmeister refers to scale steps not by
numbers but by placement in a significant harmony (Werckmeister 1700,
Chapter 4): scale-step 1 is the “fundamental note of the triad of the
primary cadence” (Fundamental-Clave triadis clausulae primariae), scale-
step 3 is the “middle note of the harmonic triad,” and scale-step 7 is the
“middle note of the triad of the secondary [half] cadence.” Despite the
clumsy terminology, the harmonic-functional perspective that places notes
of the scale into significant chords is clear.

HEINICHEN’S DISCUSSION OF UNFIGURED BASSES

Of all the writers who discuss unfigured basses, Heinichen as usual is the
most comprehensive, offering three strategies even in his briefer 1711

Thoroughbass Methods

77


=== PAGE 88 ===

78

treatise. First, he demonstrates how to figure out the chords according to
the intervals between the bass part and a solo part. This, the easiest
technique, is not an option when the solo part has rests or is absent from
the continuo part.

His second method is that used by Penna, Gasparini, and St. Lambert:
rules based on characteristic bass intervals regardless of the key. Instead
of presenting an endless series of rules and exceptions, as his predecessors
had done, Heinichen formulates his recommendations in six General Rules
in the 1711 treatise (pp. 193-195). These rules cover what to do with
rising and falling semitones or thirds, sharps in the bass, and potential
cross relations. As with the rules given by others, Heinichen’s work often
but not all of the time.

To remedy this, he turns to his third strategy: Special Rules specifying
the location of various chords within keys. These are more general than
Campion’s recommendations and do not deal with as many harmonies as
Campion covers. The first four rules explain the required notes in major
and minor keys (leading tones and the minor form of scale-step 6 in minor)
and that “the semitone below and the third above the tone of any key”
require a 6-chord. Heinichen then introduces his formulation of the régle
(shown in Example 3-18).

The remaining two Special Rules, 5 and 6, cover key changes. According
to rule 5, a new sharp or the absence of a sharp previously present
determines the semitone of the mode, thereby indicating a new key. Rule
6 lists the common goals of changes of key for major and minor: major
keys move to their third, fifth, and sixth; minor keys commonly move to
their third and fifth, also to their seventh and fourth, and rarely to their
sixth,

Like Campion, and in contrast to both the contrapuntal theories of the
seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries and earlier thoroughbass meth-
ods, Heinichen demonstrates a strong harmonic and tonal sense. As in-

‘adequate as his rules may be for explaining many usages or even for

predicting the proper harmonies in a given context, they are an attempt
to establish harmonic and voice-leading norms within major and minor
keys and to explain how movement from one key to another affects
harmony and voice leading.

Heinichen greatly expanded this section in his 1728 treatise. There are
now eight General Rules (Buelow 1966a, pp. 207-210), which cover a
larger number of situations in both major and minor keys. The six Special
Rules are also expanded (ibid., pp. 210-218) and now cover different
possibilities for ascending and descending motions: for instance, scale-step
4 may support a 5/3, 6/3, or 6/5/3 chord when ascending by step, but a
6/4/2 in a stepwise descent; scale-step 2 in major keys bears a 6 when
moving stepwise, but a 5/3 when followed by skips; scale-step 6 bears a

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 89 ===

6 when skipping to scale-step 4, but bears a 5/3 chord in other circum-
stances. These rules amply supplement what is contained in his revised
régle.

Between the General Rules, the Special Rules, and the régle, Heinichen
covers a large number of harmonic norms. But even with all this infor-
mation, the inadequacies described in connection with other approaches
to unfigured basses still remain, requiring numerous Special Observations
whenever Heinichen approaches a given situation. This is most evident in
the fascinating penultimate chapter of the 1728 treatise, where Heinichen
adds figures to the bass throughout an entire solo cantata by Alessandro
Scarlatti (1660-1725) and explains every choice as he goes along (English
translation in Buelow 1966a, pp. 230—260).5 This chapter of Heinichen’s
gives us a unique opportunity to view a composition from a contemporary
musician’s perspective. It merits line-by-line study in addition to the salient
points covered here in connection with Example 3-21.

In general, Heinichen’s chord choices are made on local criteria—the
immediately preceding or following notes. He generally cites one of the
Special Rules, regarding it as self-evident that a given scale degree in the
given circumstance requires a certain harmony. Thus at the very opening,
after ascertaining from the first two chords, which he calls a cadence, that
the key is E minor (despite the signature and the opening bass note),
Heinichen cites scale-step rules for the choice of chord over the first eight
notes (see Example 3-21).

Adagio

= = ———— —

Adagio ; - Ls ms
tre

Example 3-21. Heinichen 1728; Buelow 1966a, pp. 231-232, mm. 1-3.
The realization is according to Buelow, p. 282. The comments
paraphrase Heinichen’s text.

The first note implies the key of B minor; but the cadence (B to E) indicates
E minor with an incorrect signature. Conclusion: never judge the key from
the first note but rather from the first cadence.

5. Another realization of this unfigured bass according to Heinichen’s instructions is in
Schering 1931, pp. 378~383.

Thoroughbass Methods

79


=== PAGE 90 ===

80

Each B, as scale-step 5, carries a major third.

The C in measure 1 carries a sixth, being the sixth degree skipping to the
fourth degree.

Di, the leading tone, carries a sixth.

G, scale-step 3, carries a sixth.

Ff, as scale-step 2, could have a major sixth. But when 2 immediately precedes
a cadence, it is more beautiful to retain a seventh over it.

The Bs at the cadence could have 4-#, $j, or just a major third. Remember
this cadence pattern because it is very common.

Scale-step harmonic norms and cadence patterns clearly play the major
roles here. In some later passages, such as the opening of the recitative in
Example 3-22, preparation for a cadence provides an explanation for the
harmonic motion throughout an entire phrase. B, leading tone in C major,
supports a first-inversion triad. The A can support a triad (as scale-step 6
in a major key), but

an experienced accompanist, however, would prefer to give this note a major
6, since the two bass notes C and B have preceded . . . In a major scale if a
bass descends stepwise a fourth, the second bass note normally has the
[minor] 6th and the third [note] the major sixth: C § &* G. Reason: This
progression forms a half cadence with the fifth degree of the scale and requires
the major sixth as leading tone over the third note. Even though the half
cadence in our example is broken off after the &* and in place of the final G
an unrelated $f chord is taken, this [latter chord] is only an inversion of the
preceding 4* whose resolution to G follows.

This remarkable paragraph explains clearly that a four-measure pro-
gression with five harmonies is but an extended half cadence; that as such
it implies specific harmonies to fill in the motion between the first and last
chords; and that one of the connecting chords can be extended by inversion
(and have an added note, since Eb is not implied over the bass A but is in
the melody over the bass F#). Heinichen’s method here is similar to his
approach to complex dissonances: search for the explanation to a complex
usage in a simpler underlying structure. The appearance of this approach

ae a aa

Sa-zio an-co-ra non sei d’a ver-mi a- per-toil cor, fan-ciulcru- de- le, con mil-lee mil- le stra- li?

aS
4

Example 3-22. Heinichen 1728; Buelow 1966a, pp. 234-235

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 91 ===

cu- re mo- les-te in-fra le  spi- ne di ge- lo- so ti- mo- re in mar’ di

Adi dssanse ner

is

Li)

Lit

d'un i- dol trop-po in- gra- to tra gl'in- gan- ni mor- ta- li

a

=

Example 3-23. Heinichen 1728; Buelow 1966a, p. 235

in two separate discussions suggests that it was an integral part of Hein-
ichen’s overall perspective. Perhaps the most striking feature of this dis-
cussion is that Heinichen treats the entire four measures as a passage in
C major, despite the bass Ft. For in general, Heinichen, like all theorists
of his time, regards almost any chromaticism as a signal of a temporary
key change.

Heinichen’s perspective and Niedt’s diminution techniques imply that
perceptive musicians using thoroughbass methods were aware of the re-
lationship between a compositional surface and the structural foundation
lying below its surface. Although Heinichen is capable of such insights in
some passages, he is puzzled in connection with others, including the
immediately following portion of the same recitative (see Example 3-23).
Heinichen knows that the chord over the asterisked C needs a minor third
(E>) because of the minor sixth between the bass and the solo part. But
try as he might, he cannot figure out the scale to which the chord belongs:

In this case the scale seems to be so obscure that one really cannot name or
distinguish it. This bass note with its minor sixth cannot belong to G minor,
because the Specie octavae [the scale] of G minor does not include Ab but
A. Also one cannot consider it part of C minor, because otherwise the leading
tone B instead of Bb would follow (on the next bass note]. It cannot belong
to Ab major, because the Specie octavae for this scale does not contain a D.

Thoroughbass Methods

81


=== PAGE 92 ===

82

On the other hand, this D appears over the Bb, and from this it becomes
clear that in this case the 6b/C chord cannot be reduced to any scale.

Heinichen’s notion of extended cadential preparation, which serves him
so well elsewhere, deserted him here. He fails to note that the coming
cadence is on Eb, albeit E> minor. Probably the distant relationship per-
ceived between parallel major and minor keys in early eighteenth century
theory would not allow him to see that the Ab chord could be part of the
key of Eb, suddenly changing to minor at the cadential arrival.

Two Eighteenth-Century Bach Analyses

The manuscript of Volume 1 of the Well-Tempered Clavier known as
P4o1 contains analytic markings in an unknown hand in the C-minor
Fugue and the D-minor Prelude.’ The analyses, probably dating from
Leipzig in the 1730s or 1740s, do not follow procedures mentioned in
any particular thoroughbass manual. Nevertheless they reflect the thinking
that underlies rules for unfigured basses as well as other aspects of tho-
roughbass methods, thereby confirming the prevalence of these modes of
thought in the early eighteenth century (see Example 3-24).’

The C-minor Fugue contains three types of analytic notations. First,
there is a series of numbers under each lowest note. They indicate scale
steps, numbered 1 through 8 at first, then with nearly every 8 replaced by
f (for finalis) after measure 3. These scale-step numbers frequently shift
key, with the shift generally taking place underneath a new leading tone
or the negation of an old leading tone. For instance, the numbers shift to
G minor under the top-voice F# in measure 3. During the episode in
measures 5 and 6, the numbers shift to C minor, then to Bb major under
the Al, and to C minor under the Bh.

The second set of analytic markings is a separate series of numbers for
each upper voice. These numbers function like thoroughbass figures, mea-
suring intervals over the bass. The fs in measures 3 and 7 seem to be silly
substitutions for 8, probably made because the notes in question are both
an octave over the lowest voice and also the final of the key.

The third set of analytic symbols are short lines that connect stepwise
motions into scale-steps 3, 5, or 8: 7-8, 6-5, 4-5, and so forth. These lines
do not appear consistently. But there is an interesting line across the skip

6. Similar analyses appear in other Bach manuscripts, including P418 (French suites).

7. Spitta 1889 erroneously believed that the analytic markings show J. S. Bach testing
Rameau’s harmonic theories on his own works (an error repeated in some modern writings).
The markings are not in J. S. Bach’s hand and they have nothing to do with Rameau. Diirr
1986 and Deppert 1987 reliably interpret the markings. Similar analyses appear in one of
the manuscripts of the French suites.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 93 ===

87 856878 215 £7 8 245 6

Pre
3.78 66 5665+ 654 3 65 3 4 3 656 4 #3 656 4
PG) A
= ms. =

Bo

67f —445 65432 f7

34683 45%

—

3.2 3°94 7 £ 27 f f 2345 6 —245
Bae =f
433798 6 6 5 3

T
f 1 4538 fetc

4

a

at beter
pei

f7 f 5S 6 £78 2

Example 3-24. J. S. Bach, C-minor Fugue in P4o1. The key signature is Dorian
(without Ab).

Thoroughbass Methods

83


=== PAGE 94 ===

Example 3-25. J. S. Bach, D-minor Prelude in P401

of a seventh in measure 6, possibly to indicate that this skip of a seventh
is really a conjunct 2-1 despite the registral change that gets the middle
voice out of the way before the bass-voice entry.

The D-minor Prelude contains similar analytic markings in a different
handwriting and with some additional features (Example 3-25). The tho-
roughbass intervals are written one above the other, confirming that the
analyst saw the right hand as chordal arpeggiations. In addition, the keys
are labeled: F dur on system 2, B dur and G moll on system 4, and so
forth. Above the prelude, a series of numbers lists all the keys in the
prelude as scale steps within the overall tonic. The numbers begin F
(finalis), 3, 6, 4, and so forth, for D minor, F major, Bb major, and G

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 95 ===

U5) (16)

1 !
a
RO
wn

Example 3-26. J. S. Bach, D-minor Prelude, mm. 13-17

minor. The number 16 at the end is the total number of keys (an error
due to one omitted key).

Some of the key changes are quite temporary, such as measure 14 of
the prelude (shown in Example 3-26), where only two eighth notes are
analyzed in Bb major. Although it seems narrow-minded to cite such a
brief key change, doing so confirms the practicality of the analytic method
and early eighteenth-century attitudes toward keys and key changes in
general. Both thoroughbass players and composers needed to know the
proper chord over each and every bass note. A 6/45 chord appears only
over the leading tone of a key; hence in measure 14, the bass A is best
understood as scale-step 7. Whether thoroughbass is a real-time perfor-
mance aid or a method to learn composition—and the best thoroughbass
manuals claimed to be both—its notation was designed to deal with
immediate issues, not long-range analytic contemplation. By contrast, the
listing of keys atop the D-minor Prelude was probably meant for just such
contemplation after the details of the piece had been ascertained. The
difference between the long-range structure atop the score and the quick
changes in the score helps us to understand why the notion of secondary
dominant or tonicizing dominant took so long to become universal. The
eighteenth-century analyst knew that the excursion to Bb in measure 14
of the prelude is a temporary one, and that the Bb is ultimately scale-step
6 of the overall tonic. But that did not change the fact that within measure
14, A-Bb was best understood as scale-steps 7-8 in Bb.

Thoroughbass Methods

85


=== PAGE 96 ===

86

Minor
mode:

Major
mode:

Nota Chordae Chordae Chordae Chordae Chorda Nota
finalis essentiales naturales necessariae elegantiores peregrina finalis

no. —— =o = ee
ae = == SS -

Example 3-27. Walther 1732, article modus musicus

This type of thinking continues throughout the century. In 1784, Mozart
cites the key of C minor to explain the proper doubling for a B-diminished-
seventh chord lasting a single eighth note within a long cadential prepa-
ration in G minor (Mozart 1784, fol. 8°).

Finally, next to some chromatic notes there are letters that abbreviate
terms for scale steps in several books: Mattheson 1719 (pp. 16-20) and
1735 (p. 126), Kellner 1732 (pp. 44f.), and Walther 1732 (articles chordes
belles and modus musicus)® (see Example 3-27). For instance, in measure
16 of the D-minor Prelude, c.e. under the 4 means chorda elegantior, or
scale-step #4. Calling the C# #4 in G rather than 7 in the key of D shows
considerable sophistication on the part of the analyst. G is a better local
key than D at this point because the bass Ds in the previous and following
measures support b 6/4 or 7/53, harmonies appropriate to scale-step 5 in
the key of G, not to scale-step 1 in the key of D.

Despite the sophistication of such aspects of the analyses, they are not
without errors. In the C-minor Fugue, the key of Ab is retained throughout
the subject entry in Eb (measures 11-12) despite numerous D-naturals.
And in measure 5, beat 2, of the D-minor Prelude, the analyst misread
the bass note as F and figured 9/5/4—the resulting unresolved dissonant
F in the bass should have indicated to the analyst that the bass note should
be E.

The limitations of the entire analytic method are evident at the very end
of the prelude. In the absence of a bass, the analyst despaired at labeling
a string of diminished triads with keys, scale-step numbers, or interval
numbers. Instead, only some individual notes receive labels, such as c.e.
and p. (peregrina for the foreign form of scale-step 3).

Without a verbal text, we cannot be sure why the analysts went to such
trouble. But from the written evidence, it seems likely that these analyses
were done to show how scale-step norms taught by thoroughbass appear
in actual compositions. The analysts possibly compared the intervals above
the bass to the scale-step norms expressed in the régle and in rules for

8. Mattheson, who first proposed such names in Germany, probably modeled them on
a briefer list in Brossard 1703 (article modo).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 97 ===

Doubled fifth

H ——" eel 3— Dou! irc
2S SSeS SSS

+ Final

Example 3-28. Frére 1706, p. 10

unfigured basses. To make such a comparison between these pieces and
the norms, the anaiysts had to know the key, the scale step of each bass
note, and the intervals set against those scale steps—precisely the infor-
mation contained in the analyses. For instance, in measure 3 of the C-
minor Fugue, the analyst probably noted that the intervals over scale steps
7, 2, f, 6, and 4 are parts of the chords prescribed for those degrees in the
régle or in scale-step norms described in Heinichen’s or another author’s
treatise. The augmented second over scale-step 6 and the fourth over scale-
step 5 toward the end of the measure might have then been ascribed to
the idiosyncrasy of the experienced composer.

The lines showing conjunct connections to scale-steps 3, 5, and 8 were
probably inserted to show how notes within a phrase always seem to
return to the members of the tonic triad. Many published works of the
time explored such an attitude. Frére 1706, for instance, illustrates how
the notes of the triad built on the final form “the basis of melodic struc-
ture” (la baze de la Modulation, p. 5) (see Example 3-28).

By applying information found in many thoroughbass and composition
manuals of the period in a manner not appearing in any published works,
these analyses help to fill that ever-present gap between the way ideas
appear in treatises and the way materials might have been used pedagog-
ically. It is a confirmation of the vitality and flexibility of the one-on-one
teacher-student pedagogy of the time that these analyses do not imitate
any particular published work. The analysis of the C-minor Fugue seems
to be written in a more experienced hand than the analysis of the D-minor
Prelude (judging from the imaginary straight line under the numbers below
the bass in the C-minor Fugue, the similar size of all the numerals, and
the absence of mistakes as basic as that in measure 5 of the D-minor
Prelude). Perhaps the C-minor analysis was done by the unknown teacher
as a demonstration, and the D-minor analysis as an exercise by the un-
known student.

Summary

In many ways, thoroughbass is merely a system of simultaneity classifi-
cation designed to train performers, largely by rote repetition, to realize
the harmonies and voice leadings specified by the figures or suggested by
the structure of the bass. With the capacity to label any simultaneity

Thoroughbass Methods 87


=== PAGE 98 ===

88

according to the intervals above the bass, thoroughbass can name and
discuss the behavior of any verticality conceivable in tonal music. But this
universal applicability of thoroughbass figures is also its primary limita-
tion. The neutrality of thoroughbass figures, which can be applied equally
to any simultaneity, precludes any functional hierarchization of harmon-
ies—a triad and a sonority with multiple suspensions are both simply
chords. In addition, classifying harmonies according to their figuring im-
plies that chords figured similarly are close in function and that chords
figured differently are different in function. Assuming that the bass voice
is the sole point against which to measure intervals works against recog-
nizing that intervals consonant with the bass may be better understood
structurally as dissonances against another essential note of the harmony.
Without a comprehensive explanation of the way pitches interact with one
another, the methods introduce huge numbers of rules and exceptions that
apply to some contexts but need amendments for many others. All this
excludes from thoroughbass the differentiations between chord types and
chord functions—nonharmonic versus chord tones, and structural chords
versus passing chords—that are central to modern theories of harmony.
And all these factors work against turning thoroughbass into an expla-
nation of the harmonic framework of a passage.

Nonetheless, thoroughbass methods bring to the fore aspects of musical
structure absent from many of the contrapuntal theories of the time. With
its ability to convert any combination of notes into figures and place them
into a context—even if an adequate explanation of that simultaneity or
its context were not forthcoming—thoroughbass oversteps the bounds of
a species approach or any other manner of presenting prima pratica coun-
terpoint. This may be the source of J. S$. Bach’s supposed dissatisfaction
with “the dry species of counterpoint that are given in Fux and others.”
While contrapuntal theory required a structurally reductive process like
Bernhard’s in order to deal with contemporary practices, thoroughbass
could immediately incorporate any contemporary practice merely by in-
cluding the harmony and voice leading in the figuring.

The whole notion of key structure, which was bypassed entirely or
treated in terms of modes in contrapuntal approaches, came to the fore
in thoroughbass approaches. The need to know the key at every point
spurred the codification of major and minor keys, the growing standard-
ization of key signatures, the explanation of how to recognize keys, and
the establishment of standard progressions in each key, whether by means
of the régle or various verbal explanations of common practices. And the
inclusion of only triads and seventh chords in the régle and in various
rules for unfigured basses promoted the sense that these harmonies were
more fundamental than what we view today as chords with added non-
harmonic tones. Furthermore, as we have seen in various discussions by

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 99 ===

Heinichen, Niedt, C. P. E. Bach, and others, perceptive comments about
musical structure were often generated by the desire to explain various
practices.

Thoroughbass approaches, at least in the hands of the more perceptive
theorists, thus contained a wealth of knowledge about musical structure.
But the multitude of rules and exceptions and the ever-growing number
of chords and signatures called attention to the need for a more systematic
way of explaining all these interactions. Mizler—perhaps facetiously, per-
haps in desperation—suggested “one single rule”:

The intervals of the harmonic triad (the octave, fifth, and third) can ascend
as well as descend to all possible intervals, and all possible intervals can once
again be resolved by ascent as well as descent to each interval of the harmonic
triad, and each dissonant interval, before being resolved into the harmonic
triad, can first proceed several times to all possible dissonant intervals, de-
pending upon the circumstances. All this must always happen so that no
nonharmonic relationship occurs and no fifths and octaves follow one an-
other immediately, be they direct or hidden, unless they are so covered by
many other intervals that the ear does not take note of them. (Mizler 1736-
1754, Vol. 1, Part 5, p. 66)

It was to address this situation that Rameau published the first compre-
hensive attempt at an explanation in 1722. Within a generation his influ-
ence changed forever the context of discussions of musical structure.

Thoroughbass Methods

89


=== PAGE 100 ===

CHAPTER FOUR

GE OK S>

Rameau’s Early Works

Music is a science which should have definite rules; these rules should be
drawn from an evident principle; and this principle cannot really be
known to us without the aid of mathematics. Notwithstanding all the
experience I may have acquired in music from being associated with it
for so long, I must confess that only with the aid of mathematics did my
ideas become clear and did light replace a certain obscurity of which I

was unaware before.
Rameau 1722, preface

Rameau as a Theorist of Harmony

Harmony joins counterpoint and thoroughbass as the third theoretical
tradition inherited by the early eighteenth century. It too traces its lineage
back to the sixteenth century. But it was the least developed of the three
before the Traité de l’harmonie by Jean-Philippe Rameau (1683-1764)
appeared in 1722. This is because counterpoint and thoroughbass had
immediately practical applications in the seventeenth century. Counter-
point codified voice interactions for instruction in composition, both in
the stile antico and in more modern styles, and thoroughbass taught
patterns of simultaneity successions for performers who needed to realize
figured and unfigured basses and for composers who assembled these
patterns into new compositions.

The study of harmony, although it had been the medium for important
theoretical breakthroughs in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth cen-
turies, had no comparable pedagogical application. Many of the theoretical
tenets that Rameau drew together in his theories—chord inversion, har-
monic scale-step norms, basic harmonic progressions (especially cadences),
dissonance resolutions, and cadential evasion—were recognized before he
was born. But they had remained isolated bits of information and rules of
thumb. Rameau built a perspective on musical structure from these tenets,


=== PAGE 101 ===

thereby transforming them from peripheral information to the center of
musical knowledge.

By re-examining musical knowledge and reorganizing it according to
what he regarded as more consistent principles, Rameau brought to music
theory the intellectual revolution that transformed Western thought in the
seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. René Descartes (1596-1650)
had both reflected changed attitudes in thinking and also propelled these
changes with new energy and direction. Facts were no longer valid because
they stood the test of time; now they would have to pass the test of reason
as well. “At best an argument from what has been, to what should of
right be, has no force” (John Locke, Second Treatise on Government
1689, par. 103).

Furthermore, facts were not to be accepted simply because they existed:
their significance was to be deduced according to first principles, which
gave them a place in the cosmos of ideas. Copying Descartes, who sought
to place all knowledge on a solid methodological foundation built on the
principles of mathematics, Rameau sought basic principles that would
place musical knowledge on a sound footing and replace the myriad rules
and exceptions of thoroughbass and counterpoint—a disorganized mass
of individual facts and opinions that had arisen from unconsidered
experience.

But Rameau was not merely a deductive systematizer who followed his
reasoning wherever it led him and disregarded musical realities. He was a
practical musician, a major organist, and one of the great composers of
the century. He would have no part of the theorizing of musical amateurs
and lesser musicians who, caught up in the investigative spirit of the age,
attempted to systematize musical knowledge without knowing music well,
who rejected common chords or progressions that had did not fit into
some deductive system, and who proposed musical practices that bore
little resemblance to common reality.

For Rameau, the deductive process, which exalts reason over experience,
did not necessarily denigrate the practical, living knowledge yielded by
experience. Practical skills were not only useful, since “a musician can
excel in the practice of his art without knowing theory” (Rameau 1726,
title to Chapter 21)—they were absolutely necessary: “Only by means of
keyboard accompaniment can one promptly acquire a sensibility to har-
mony” (ibid., title to Chapter 22). Throughout his life he addressed prac-
tical concerns: Books 3 and 4 of his Traité (1722) treat composition and
accompaniment, the latter reading in many places like a thoroughbass
manual; his Dissertation of 1732 defends a new method of accompani-
ment; the longest chapter in his Generation of 1737 deals with composi-
tion; and the Code of 1761 is largely a method teaching composition and
accompaniment.

Rameau’s Early Works

91


=== PAGE 102 ===

92

No matter how important experience was, Rameau argued as a Carte-
sian that knowledge and skills gained thereby were unreliable without
understanding their foundation. Reasoned knowledge together with skills
attained through experience would complement one another. The mediat-
ing factor was talent—a gift of Nature. Reasoned knowledge, experienced
skills, and talent had to work together. Even “persons with mature taste”
and a “natural gift” might “stray from the truth unless this gift is sustained
by knowledge, though knowledge cannot suffice for perfection unless good
taste comes to its aid” (Rameau 1722, Book 3, Chapter 41).

Talent is crucial for Rameau because “music is doubtless natural to us”
(Rameau 1726, p. 90). Nature allows a naive singer to discover the inter-
vals and structure of the major scale merely by singing what comes nat-
urally (ibid., Chapter 9). And, as Rameau urges his readers to prove by
experiment, Nature bestows on “anyone sensitive to harmony, even chil-
dren of 8 or 9,” the ability to sing the fundamental bass (what we call the
root) of a cadential chord without even knowing what they are doing
(ibid., Chapter 10). The full title of the Traité, “Treatise on Harmony
reduced to its natural principles,” reflects both Rameau’s Cartesian search
for first principles and his belief that music has a natural basis. In arguing
from Nature, Rameau shared common roots with many diverse traditions
of musical thought in the eighteenth century. As the German musical
scholar Lorenz Mizler (1711-1778) wrote in 1737, “‘orderly’ and ‘natural’
are one and the same in music, for Nature itself orders the tones . . .
[F]rom this natural ordering of tones arise all other truths in music”
(Mizler 1736-1754, Vol. 4, p. 60).

Because Rameau both searched for the basic principles underlying music
and also addressed practical concerns, his works often present two seem-
ingly separate explanations for a given phenomenon. As speculative the-
orist he will offer an explanation, while as practical theorist he will con-
centrate on the results. When a speculative perspective is prominent in
one work and a practical perspective predominates in others, it has seemed
to many scholars that Rameau changed his opinions on the issue. But
often, Rameau held similar views in both works, although he may have
spoken speculatively in one and practically in another.

Rameau’s ideas continued to evolve throughout his lifetime. Many of
these changes took place in the speculative side of his theories. Consider
the minor triad, a perennial source of trouble for Rameau the speculative
theorist. For reasons to be discussed below, Rameau repeatedly proposed
new methods of deriving the minor triad, once even offering two deriva-
tions within the same treatise (Rameau 1750). But whatever his justifica-
tion for the minor triad in any given work, Rameau the practical musician
always recognized that the minor triad was just as firm a foundation of
musical structure as the major triad. As a result, many theoretical battles

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 103 ===

that have been cast as pro-Rameau versus anti-Rameau from the eighteenth
century to the present day are also battles within Rameau’s own works:
Rameau the speculative theorist versus Rameau the practical theorist, or
Rameau the speculative theorist in one work versus Rameau the specula-
tive theorist in another.

Thus the charge that Rameau “pronounced a theory, whereas thorough-
bass was essentially a practice” (Mitchell 1949, p. 17) is ultimately a
criticism largely directed against the speculative side of his writings. Both
the speculative and practical sides of Rameau might have argued against
this statement by noting that the ultimate value of reason lies not in
abstractions but in practical applications. For him, the innumerable rules
and exceptions of traditional theory of thoroughbass and counterpoint-
composition were the impractical side of music theory.

Because Rameau built much of his new perspective from existing tenets
and verifiable musical facts, many of his ideas spread throughout the
musical world quite rapidly. Within a decade after the appearance of
Rameau’s Traité in 1722, many of its premises had been adopted by an
anonymous French musician arguing with Rameau in the pages of the
prestigious Parisian journal Mercure de France over how to apply some
of his ideas, not whether to apply them. Rameau’s Traité is probably the
source for the discussion of inversions in Heinichen’s 1728 thoroughbass
treatise; David Kellner’s formulation of chordal inversions in his extremely
popular thoroughbass manual of 1732 is even closer to Rameau’s than is
Heinichen’s. During the 1730s and 1740s English, French, and German
publications on thoroughbass and composition are based on Rameau’s
theories. Beginning in the 1750s, students of J. S. Bach who claimed to
deal with their teacher’s composition method were analyzing the master’s
compositions with Rameau’s theories (Nichelmann and Kirnberger). And
musicians avowing to be opponents of Rameau claimed that they or their
own predecessors had discovered tenets of his theory.

Rameau’s ideas on harmony rapidly transformed counterpoint and tho-
roughbass. By the last third of the century, counterpoint was more often
than not presented as the activation of a harmonic structure (in Kirnberger
1771-1779 and Koch 1782—1793), and species counterpoint was under-
stood in terms of chords and their inversions, even when Fuxian methods
were used (in Mozart 1784 and Albrechtsberger 1790). Thoroughbass
came to be taught in terms of triads, seventh chords, and their inversions,
much as Rameau had recommended in 1722 (as in Tiirk 1791). Even the
composition method of Johann Philipp Kirnberger (1721-1783), published
in the 1770s, in which Kirnberger claimed to follow the instructional
method of his teacher J. S. Bach, is largely based on Rameau’s theories;
this despite the fact that it was supposedly to support Kirnberger’s treatise
that C. P. E. Bach penned his famous remark “you can loudly declare that

Rameav’s Early Works

93


=== PAGE 104 ===

94

my principles and those of my late father are anti-Rameau” (Kirnberger
1771-1779, Vol. 2, p. 188). The study of harmony long remained the
heart of tonal music theory.

Unlike the traditions of counterpoint and thoroughbass, which derive
from the works of numerous writers, harmonic theory first rose to prom-
inence in the eighteenth century because of works published by a single
theorist over several decades. Since much of what happened in theory later
in the century was dependent on understandings and misunderstandings
of the tenets and attitudes enunciated by Rameau, a full appreciation of
later theory is possible only via knowledge of Rameau’s ideas and their
manner of presentation.

Rameau’s Works

Rameau was a mature musician when he began producing the works that
made him famous as a theorist and composer. When his first treatise, the
Traité de l’harmonie, appeared in 1722, he was already thirty-nine and
still relatively obscure, describing himself, in a country where Paris was
by far the most important musical center, as “Organist of the Cathedral
of Clermont in Auvergne.” Likewise, he was fifty when his first opera
premiered in 1733. With untiring energy, he became one of the most
prolific music theorists of any age, publishing several lengthy treatises and
numerous shorter works during the four decades after 1722. At age eighty,
Rameau poignantly described how he treasured the few hours of daylight
during which his failing eyesight still allowed him to put his ideas to paper
(Rameau CTW 6, p. xli—xlii).

Rameau published several treatises, smaller independent items, and
many letters and articles in variuus journals. Additional items remained
in manuscript, some only recently rediscovered, some still unpublished,
others apparently lost. With the great number of his writings, there are
minor discrepancies in the contents of the four comprehensive lists of his
published and unpublished writings (Rameau CTW 6, pp. lxix—Ixxi; Gir-
dlestone 1969, pp. 581-582; Cyr 1980; Damschroder-Williams 1990). All
the published works appear in facsimile in Jean-Philippe Rameau, Com-
plete Theoretical Writings (Rameau CTW below), along with many con-
temporaneous secondary sources. Erwin Jacobi’s meticulous introductory
essays in each of the six volumes constitute the single most comprehensive
study to date of the circumstances surrounding Rameau’s writings, critical
reception of his works, and people connected with his theories.}

1. In addition to secondary literature cited in connection with specific points, the most
comprehensive surveys of Rameau’s theories in English are Shirlaw 1917 and Ferris 1959,
which concentrate on Rameau’s speculative ideas; Keane 1961, which offers a broad survey;
and Christensen 1993, which places Rameau in the intellectual world of his time.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 105 ===

Rameau’s major works, all published in Paris, are the following (the
Bibliography contains information on facsimiles and translations):?

Traité de l’harmonie reduite a ses principes naturels (1722)

Nouveau systéme de musique theorique ... pour servir d’introduction
au Traité de l’harmonie (1726)
Dissertation sur les différentes métodes d’accompagnement . . . avec le

plan d’une nouvelle métode (1732)

Generation harmonique, ou Traité de musique théorique et pratique
(1737)

Démonstration du principe de l’harmonie, servant de base 4 tout Vart
musical théorique G pratique (1750)

Observations sur notre instinct pour la musique, et sur son principe
(1754)

Code de musique pratique .. . avec de nouvelles réflexions sur le principe
sonore [1761]

Origine des sciences (1762)

Rameau addressed his works to a wide range of audiences. Some works
are dense speculative tracts, some are practical. Some are philosophical
musings on musical and nonmusical topics. Some are addressed to musi-
cians. Others are for musical amateurs, among them the Dissertation,
whose title page explains that his new accompaniment method can be
used “even by those who do not know how to read music,” and the Code:
methods to learn music, even by the blind.

Rameau republished none of his works and seems never to have con-
templated preparing a definitive edition (as Zarlino did in 1589), whether
because he feared difficulty finding a publisher due to the hostility between
himself and the Encyclopedists in his later years (Rameau CTW 1, pp. xiii-—
xiv), or, more probably, because he was still searching for new solutions
to problematic areas in his theories. He was an inveterate reviser of his
writings. Even after the Traité had been printed, Rameau had substitute
pages printed and inserted in the book, and then issued a Supplement
along with it containing numerous other changes of substance and of
details (Gossett 1971, pp. vii—xii).

The Traité of 1722, although it does not contain a number of Rameau’s
most significant theoretical ideas, was the work that first introduced his
ideas to the musical world. This chapter covers Rameau’s ideas as pre-

2. Manuscript treatises date from before, during, and after the period of these publica-
tions, Suaudeau 1958 and 1960, though brief and relatively uninformative, are the only
sources for now-lost manuscripts dating from 1716-1722. Christensen 1987a and 1990a
discuss an important manuscript composition treatise probably written between 1737 and
1744 and published in modified form as Gianotti 1759. Schneider 1986 includes Rameau’s
last treatise (1763-1764).

Rameau’s Early Works

95


=== PAGE 106 ===

96

sented fully in this first treatise. Chapter 5 treats his ideas as they developed
in his later works, including aspects of his theory that appear in the Traité
but are much more fully developed later.

Chords and Inversions

Rameau believed that triads and seventh chords, along with their inver-
sions and other derivatives, accounted for all the structurally meaningful
harmonies in tonal music. He also seems to have believed he was the first
to relate different chords as inversions of one another: “why is it that
until the Traité de l’harmonie it was not known that a certain number of
chords could join together in one?” The footnote to this passage is “See,
on this subject, all treatises on music” (Rameau 1732, p. 14; Hayes 1974a,
p. 19).

In the absence of thorough studies of earlier theory, this assertion was
accepted by those who supported Rameau and wished to make him the
sole discoverer of chordal inversion and by those who attacked Rameau
and wished to blame him for the same discovery. When Hugo Riemann
cited ambiguous statements hinting at knowledge of chord inversions in
thoroughbass manuals around 1700 by Werckmeister and Keller, Matthew
Shirlaw vigorously defended Rameau’s priority (Riemann 1898, pp. 431—
4333 Mickelsen 1977, pp. 160-161; Shirlaw 1917, pp. xii—xiii, 8-12, 25—
26). Schenker, probably also responding to Riemann, would hear nothing
about Germans preceding Rameau in harmonic theory. He branded chor-
dal inversion a “French innovation” and compared its results to the French
Revolution: “‘Below is above and above is below,’ screamed the French
Below . . . But what is born above remains above, just as what is below
always keeps its place, and all the murder and pillage . . . trying to overturn
this natural order remained ineffectual” (Schenker 1930, p. 14). So much
for polemic pro and con in the absence of facts.

TRIADIC INVERSIONS BEFORE RAMEAU
It is now clear that several German theorists fully grasped the unity of the
triad before the end of the sixteenth century, and that by 1610 two German
theorists had stated a theory of triadic inversion, explaining the root-
position form as the origin of the two inversions. The German theorist
Johannes Avianius (?-1617) describes perfect (5/3), imperfect (6/3), and
absurd (6/4) chords in his brief Isagoge of 1581 (in Rivera 1978). Unlike
Zarlino, who considered chords as composites of intervals, Avianius deems
chords three-pitch units even if only two different pitches are present.
Thus, he treats a chord containing only C# and A as an imperfect harmony
with a missing E.

Other German theorists of the time also treat harmonies as units (dis-

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 107 ===

PERFECT COMPOUND CONSONANCE IMPERFECT COMPOUND CONSONANCE

aries restaeae

Here the lower Or inthis Here itis This fourth is a
note of the fifth manner. expressed an dissonance

is expressed octave lower. because the lower
in its place. third is absent.

Example 4-1. Harnish 1608, p. 54

cussed in more detail in Lester 1989, pp. 28-41). Joachim Burmeister
(1564-1629) begins his discussion of composition with four-part har-
mony, offering charts with four types of chords: those with a perfect fifth
and a minor third, those with a perfect fifth and a major third, those with
minor thirds and sixths, and those with major thirds and sixths (Burmeister
1599 and 1606). Neither Avianius nor Burmeister relates different inver-
sions to one another.

Shortly thereafter, Otto Siegfried Harnish (c. 1568-1623) differentiates
the basis or fundamental note from the “lowest note of the harmony”
(inferior vox concordantiae) and recognizes the inversional relationship
among different forms of the triad (Harnish 1608) (see Example 4-1).

Two years later, Johannes Lippius (1585-1612) dubs all forms of this
chord the “harmonic triad” (trias harmonica) because, like the Holy Trin-
ity, it is a unity born of three separate parts—three pitches and three
intervals (Lippius 1610 and 1612). He explains inversions, takes note of
the “root” (radix) of both intervals and triads, differentiates major and
minor forms of the triad, and differentiates modes according to the quality
of the triad built on the final. Lippius also offers a compositional method
based on the triad, explaining how “all the melodies must so join together
that in their combination there will be no consonant portion that does not
rest on that unitrisonic harmonic root.” Smooth voice leading over a
skipping bass line will create “various kinds of triads more elegantly, more
easily, and more wonderfully mixed, combined, and arranged in proper
order” (Lippius 1612, fols. G4’-G7"; Rivera 1977, pp. 46—47).

Lippius recommends composing the bass first and placing dots to indi-
cate the notes of a triad over each bass pitch (see Example 4-2). The other
voices are to be composed by connecting those dots, as shown in Example
4-3. If one starts composing from the tenor or discant, the bass should be
added first, with the remaining voices built from the bass. Ornaments of
rhythm (unequal note values or syncopations), volume, or pitch (running
notes and suspensions) turn such structures into actual compositions.
Thus, the basis for an elaborative method of composition building on a

Rameau’s Early Works

97


=== PAGE 108 ===

98

==5==——
==

z
é
=

Example 4-2. Lippius 1612, fol. H1"; Rivera 1977, p. 48, with minor errors
emended

chordal texture—not unlike that presented a century later by Niedt—had
appeared in print by 1612.

Many of Lippius’ ideas were not unique to him or to German theorists.
The English poet, composer, and theorist Thomas Campion (1567-1620),
like his German contemporaries, recognizes the difference between the
sounding “Base” of a chord and its “true Base” in the mid-1610s: when
a sixth is used over the bass, “such Bases are not true Bases, for where a
sixt is to be taken, either in F sharpe, or in E sharpe [that is, E natural],
or in B or in A the true Base is a third lower, F sharpe in D, E in C, B in
G, A in F” (Campion [c. 1613], p. 204).

Discussions of inversions and chord roots appeared through the early
eighteenth century. Werckmeister 1702, in addition to showing how
knowledge of the proper root (Wurtzel) explains the doubling in a chord
of the sixth (as discussed in Chapter 3), also speaks directly of “the
inversion of the triad [Die Versetzung der Triadum] . . . such as E-G-C or
G-C-E” (p. 6). Discussions akin to Lippius in terminology appear in two
early eighteenth-century manuscript treatises by young musicians who later
became major writers: Walther 1708 (p. 101) and Scheibe c.1730 (Chap-
ters 2 and 5). Fux too explains root-position and first-inversion triads in
Gradus (as discussed in Chapter 2). Mizler, who seems to have been
unaware of Rameau’s works, treats rearrangement (Verwechselung) of
notes in a chord as everyday knowledge (Mizler 1736-1754, Vol. 1, Part
5, p. 65; Vol. 2, p. 117). Even Mattheson, who was hostile to Rameau,
speaks of triadic arpeggiation (Mattheson 1739, Part 3, Chapter 12).

Inversional thinking entirely independent of this late-sixteenth-century
and early-seventeenth-century chordal theory arose because of playing

alti

te DO- MI- NUM,
Example 4-3. Lippius 1612, fol. H1‘; Rivera 1977, p. 48

\

8

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 109 ===

1 = ou
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 etc...

Example 4-4. Open strings on a theorbo

is played as
2 |

Example 4-5. An A-5/3 chord on the theorbo

HTT} Lorce

techniques on plucked and strummed instruments.? In contrast to plucked
lute playing, which emulated the contrapuntal texture of vocal polyphony,
Iberian guitar players beginning in the late sixteenth century popularized
rasgueado or strummed chords. To strum all the strings, players grasped
chords in a fingering they could maintain for the length of a harmony.
Some of these positions created triadic inversions, used interchangeably
with the root-position form. Rasgueado technique on the guitar spread to
Italy (renamed battente) and France by the 1620s, and to England later
in the century.

Triadic inversions arose for another reason on the theorbo, a lute-like
instrument used in thoroughbass accompaniments. The theorbo’s upper
strings were tuned like the lute in descending fourths with a single major
third, but the top two strings were an octave lower than their place in the
fourth-cycle (see Example 4-4). In thoroughbass realizations, the written
bass would be played on a middle or lower string, while the chord was
strummed across the remaining upper strings. Thus a 5/3 chord built on
the top-line A in bass clef would be played as follows: the bass A would
be fingered a whole step above string number 4, C would be fingered a
half step above string number 3, and strings 1 and 2 would be strummed
as open strings (see Example 4-5). The result is a 6/4 chord, recognized
by theorbists as an inversion (renversement) of the proposed harmony. To
preserve the integrity of the bass line in theorbo realizations, Denis Delair
insists that “the bass must always precede the chord; it does not matter
which [of the other notes] is sounded first or last after the bass” (Delair
1690, fol. C’). Frangois Campion (c. 1686-1748) supports using the guitar
instead of the theorbo in accompaniments in part because “the accom-
panimental parts are not inverted [renversées]” (Campion 1716, p. 19).
Various collections of theorbo tablatures also refer to inverted chords:
Fleury 1660, Bartolomi 1669, and Grenerin [c. 1670].

3. For information in addition to that in the following discussion, see Christensen 1992a
and Mason 1981.

Rameau’s Early Works

99


=== PAGE 110 ===

100

In contrast to the older belief that Rameau invented triadic inversions,
or the more recent argument that German early-seventeenth-century in-
versional theory was soon forgotten or even “suppressed” until Rameau
rediscovered inversions (Dahlhaus 1984, p. 123; Dahlhaus 1989, p. 75),
it is clear that knowledge of triadic inversion was widespread during the
century before Rameau’s Traité. Some theorists did not refer to the con-
cept, and others may have been unsure about the exact relationship be-
tween different positions of a chord (as discussed in connection with
Heinichen in Chapter 3). But it is clear that Rameau did not invent or re-
invent the notion of triadic inversion.

So what did Rameau mean by his claim that “until the Traité de l’har-
monie it was not known that a certain number of chords could join
together in one”? What did he accomplish in this area that no one before
him had done? And why if knowledge of triadic inversions was so wide-
spread did it seem so marginal? First, Rameau extended inversional think-
ing to all chord-types, not just triads—to seventh chords, and, via his
theory of subposition (discussed below), to suspensions. Second, and more
important, he was the first to realize that the notion of chord roots could
be the basis of a powerful explanation of harmonic progression. When he
claimed that no one before him had shown how several chords were really
rearrangements of a single harmony, he probably referred to his theories
in this larger sense.

RAMEAU’S BASIC CHORD TYPES

Rameau built his theory of harmony on the belief that there are basically
only two types of chords: the perfect chord (accord parfait; Rameau never
uses the term triad) or consonant harmony, and the seventh chord or
dissonant harmony. Every harmony for him is a perfect chord, a seventh
chord, an inversion of these, or a derivative of a seventh chord (the added-
sixth chord and chords by subposition, both discussed below).

By treating these types of simultaneities, and ignoring what we nowa-
days call nonharmonic tones other than suspensions and appoggiaturas
(passing tones, neighbors, anticipations, and the like), Rameau attempted
to explain the harmonies recognized by thoroughbass (though thorough-
bass writers before Rameau did not of course categorize chords in his
manner). Thoroughbass deals with the simultaneities that need to be fig-
ured for the performer. It generally disregards post-chordal nonharmonic
tones because as a rule they do not affect what a continuo player performs
and are omitted from thoroughbass figuring. Throughout his works, Ra-
meau deals primarily with the chords that appear in French thoroughbass
methods of the period. What we call post-chordal nonharmonic tones are

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 111 ===

Fourth

Ca a generated as the fe oe Intervals
Gs 4 difference between — generated over
13 the double octave fundamental.
Lar and the twelfth zs ]
1

Example 4-6.

for Rameau “Ornamented Melody or Supposition”* (Rameau 1722, Book
3, Chapter 39), or, in his later works, “grace notes” (notes de gotit). They
belong to melody, not to harmony.

THE SOURCE OF CHORDAL INVERSION

To place his theory of chordal inversion on a solid foundation, Rameau
needed a reliable way to determine the primary form of each chord type.
For instance, 6/5 chords have the same notes as 7 chords whose bass is a
third lower. If Rameau could only demonstrate that each was a rearrange-
ment of the other, he could not show whether the 6/5 form or the 7 form
was primary. Pre-Rameau theorists might well have chosen the 6/5 form,
since it was implausible that a dissonant 7 chord might be the source of
the 6/5 chord, which contained only consonances over the bass. Rameau
needed to explain that certain intervals (and, hence, certain forms of a
chord) were the source of others. To do this, he generates the individual
consonances so that within each complementary pair of consonances
(fourth-fifth and third-sixth) one is original and the other derived from it.

To accomplish this he turns in the Traité to the age-old technique of
dividing a string. He dubs the note which sounds when an entire string
vibrates the fundamental. From half a string, the octave of the fundamental
arises. The next integral division of the string, into thirds, yields a twelfth
(a compound fifth) over the fundamental. The difference between this fifth
and the next octave yields the fourth. The origin of the fourth, however,
is entirely unlike that of the octave and the fifth: “Only the octave and
the fifth are directly generated by the fundamental sound. The fourth is
merely a result of the octave, since it arises from the difference between
this octave and the fifth” (Book 1, Chapter 3, Article 4) (see Example
4-6).

By distinguishing the fourth from the fifth and octave, Rameau takes a
route different from most earlier theorists. Zarlino, and, indeed, theorists
going back to Pythagoras, knew that string-ratio 2:1 represents the octave,
3:2 the perfect fifth, and 4:3 the perfect fourth. But for these theorists,

4. Cohen 1971 traces this meaning of the term supposition from the late sixteenth
through the mid-eighteenth century.

Rameau’s Early Works

IOI


=== PAGE 112 ===

102

Sixth

generated as the
cs, ‘a difference between [
( E4 ) eI the triple octave Intervals

_ Senet fundamental
seventeenth a E
————
C2 +1 third). =
1
Example 4-7.

the fifth and the fourth are equally original intervals. For Rameau, the
fourth is not an original interval, but, as Descartes had described it, only
“the shadow of the fifth” (Descartes 1618; Robert 1961, p. 24) because
it merely filled in the difference between the fifth and the octave but did
not itself arise over the fundamental. Thus, Rameau shows how the octave,
the fifth, and the fourth in Example 4-6 all have the same fundamental
sound. With the fundamental fifth and its derived fourth Rameau can now
explain why a 6/4 chord with a fourth over the bass is a derivative of a
perfect chord with a fifth over the bass.

To show that 6/3 chords are inversions of 5/3 chords, Rameau has to
demonstrate that sixths are similarly “shadows” of thirds. Rameau divides
the string into five parts, yielding a compound major third (a seventeenth).
The minor sixth is its complement. Thus the major third is the fundamental
interval and the minor sixth the derived interval (Book 1, Chapter 3,
Article 5). This enables him to explain that a 6/3 perfect chord with a
minor sixth over the bass is a derivative of a 5/3 chord with a major third
over the bass (see Example 4-7).

So far, so good. Rameau has shown how the perfect fifth and the major
third appear over the fundamental, and how the perfect fourth and the
minor sixth are merely complements of these two fundamental intervals.
To complete his theory of triadic inversions, Rameau need only demon-
strate the same relationship between the minor third and the major sixth.
But this last step cannot be accomplished in this manner. Put simply, the
minor third does not occur over the fundamental in any integral division
of the whole string. Rameau desperately wants it to occur there: “Since
all intervals are generated by the octave and begin and end there, so should
[!] the minor third. It should not be found indirectly, between the major
third and the fifth, but related directly to the fundamental sound or its
octave” (Book 1, Chapter 3, Article 5). If Rameau as speculative theorist
cannot demonstrate that the minor third occurs over the fundamental, he
cannot demonstrate that minor triads are basic chords akin to major triads,
which he as a practical musician knows to be true. Through the contorted
and unconvincing reasoning that follows, Rameau insists that thirds can-
not arise simultaneously when a fifth is divided; they must arise separately,

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 113 ===

and therefore can arise in either order. (Lewin 1978 comments on this
passage.) It need hardly be pointed out that this explanation is inadequate.

The derivation of the minor third was to bedevil Rameau throughout
his life. With his belief that music was Natural and with his Cartesian
belief in the explanatory power of numbers, Rameau never abandoned the
search for an origin of the minor third. He was not alone in this search—
theorists from antiquity to the present have sought the sources of their
musical system in divisions of a string or, later, in harmonic resonance
which is numerically the same as divisions of a string. Ultimately, the
reason a solution has never been found is the fallacious basis of the search:
an ethnocentric belief that music, a cultural phenomenon, is a Natural
phenomenon. As Pascal put it, “What are our natural principles if not our
acccustomed principles? . . . a different custom will yield other natural
principles” (Pascal c.1658, p. 514). Divisions of a string certainly measure
intervals. But several arbitrary assumptions (or, to be kinder, several ax-
ioms) are needed if intervals and roots are to arise in an appropriate
manner.

First, one must assume octave equivalence; that is, that all the string
divisions that are powers of 2 (halves, fourths, eighths, sixteenths, etc.)
are merely duplications of the fundamental, but that string divisions of all
other powers (of 3, for instance) are different pitches. Without octave
equivalence, for instance, the twelfth and its compounds, which do arise
from string divisions, could not be the source of the perfect fifth. For
Rameau the musician, octave equivalence seemed obvious. But in his
dispute with the eminent mathematician Leonhard Euler in the 1750s, he
could not disprove Euler’s assertion that octave duplications were not
equivalent to the fundamental (Rameau 1752; discussed in Shirlaw 1917,
PP. 274-275).

Second, one must assume that the simple numerical ratios of string
divisions do in fact represent musical intervals which are rendered in
practice in various systems of temperament (or that are frequently rendered
“out-of-tune”). Rameau argues in later works that this problem is not
serious because the small alterations arising from temperament are nearly
imperceptible. But this answer denies the very premise of the investigation.
The whole point of deriving intervals from small numbers is to demon-
strate that the consonances can be represented by small-number ratios. If
small-number ratios are perceptually equivalent to the irrational-number
ratios that arise from temperament, then there is no rationale for using
small-number ratios in the first place. For this argument insists that 3/2,
the ratio of the pure perfect fifth, is equivalent to the seventh power of
the twelfth root of 2, the ratio of the perfect fifth in equal temperament
(which Rameau supports beginning in 1737).

Third, one must exclude division of the string into sevenths. Division

Rameau’s Early Works

103


=== PAGE 114 ===

104

{
oo — £ q } —s
— | aD he
minor 3 major 3 minor thirds major thirds

and 6 and 6 and sixths and sixths

Example 4-8.

into eighths is necessary if the minor sixth (8:5) is to be included among
the consonances. But sevenths of the string create intervals that do not
agree with Western diatonic music. Zarlino had already encountered this
problem when he exalted the senario (the numbers 1-6), but allowed 8 in
order to include the minor sixth. Put briefly, one can find a rationale for
what one wants in the divisions of a string, but only by manipulating the
numbers until the desired results appear.

Despite his lifelong preoccupation with deriving intervals and chords
systematically from divisions of a string, or, later, from harmonic reso-
nance which is numerically equivalent to divisions of the string, Rameau
was never able to come up with a derivation of the minor third that was
comparable to that of the major third. Nor was he able to come up with
a derivation of the fourth degree of the scale, which likewise does not
appear in harmonic resonance, that was comparable to the derivation of
the fifth degree of the scale. And no later theorist has solved these problems
using Rameau’s or similar procedures. His attempts to do so are part of
the history of ideas of the eighteenth century, with its assumptions that
Nature is the source of music and that the proper numerical ratios con-
stitute a valid explanation. This aspect of Rameau’s speculative theory is
covered in exhaustive detail in Shirlaw 1917. Other than commenting on
his use of such reasoning, the present study will not explore further the
means Rameau used to give a speculative foundation to his musical ideas
or the adequacy of those means. It will concentrate instead on the appli-
cation of his ideas to musical situations.

Whatever the systematic shortcomings of Rameau’s derivation of the
minor third, what is important to musical practice is that Rameau sorted
out the consonances into fundamental ones (the perfect fifth and both
sorts of thirds) and their derived forms. This was a change in perspective
from Zarlino, who had derived sixths from the addition of a third to the
perfect fourth. According to this traditional method, minor thirds are
related to minor sixths and major thirds to major sixths: a fourth plus a
minor third equals a minor sixth; a fourth plus a major third equals a
major sixth. This shows how consonant 6/3 chords have a unified sound
(because the thirds and sixths are of like quality), and how the 5/3—6/3
alternation of fifth and sixth gives rise to closely related chords (see
Example 4-8). But as already noted in Chapter 1, this approach precludes

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 115 ===

Octave Fifth

_a. a.
Seventh or Major thi
minor dissonance Byala

= a #
Leading tone
Octave

or major dissonance

oe

Tonic note
or final

Dominant
ios

Fundamental
Bass

roc
na

x

Example 4-9. Rameau 1722, Book 2, Chapter 5

a theory of chord inversions. Lippius derives sixths as inversions of thirds
in his study of harmonic intervals, allowing him to present a theory of
triadic inversion. But his study of melodic intervals retains a traditional
derivation of sixths. Rameau was the first theorist to use a fully harmonic
perspective on intervallic generation for all purposes.

THE PERFECT CHORD AND ITS FUNDAMENTAL BASS

Rameau distinguishes two different basses for a perfect chord: the actual
sounding bass or the basso continuo, and the fundamental bass or fun-
damental note (basse-fondamentale, son-fondamental)—what we call the
root. Rameau’s first example of a fundamental bass (shown in Example
4-9) illustrates not an isolated chord, but the perfect cadence, an important
chord progression:$ “If the fundamental bass is removed [from the bottom
voice] and one of the other parts is put in its place, all the resulting chords
will be inversions [renversements] of the original chords. The harmony
will remain good, for even when the fundamental bass is removed, it is
always implied” (Book 2, Chapter 5).

Here and elsewhere, Rameau combines two conceptually separate as-
pects of fundamental bass (discussed in Keiler 1981): it can be an actual
voice in the texture, and it is a structural foundation explaining the other
parts. As a voice in the texture, it can appear in any register; as an
explanation for the other parts, it is implicitly the underlying source. As

5. Rameau uses multiple staffs to show the voice leading of each part. To facilitate
legibility, these examples also appear here in a two-staff version in brackets.

Rameau’s Early Works

105


=== PAGE 116 ===

106

a sounding part, it obeys voice-leading rules; as an explanation of the
other parts, it is not part of the voice leading. Rameau’s use of musical
notation for these two separate aspects is akin to Schenker’s use of single
noteheads in a graph to denote both pitches in a score and their role in
the underlying structure.

Nowadays we use Roman numerals to identify the chords, thereby
separating notationally the progression of chord roots from any actual
voice in the texture. Placing numbers next to a score to label the chord
roots was published as early as 1766, but the practice was not widely
adopted until well into the nineteenth century.

It is easy to view Roman numerals as a substitute notation for Rameau’s
fundamental bass notated on a separate staff. But translating Rameauian
fundamental bass into Roman numerals actually marks a significant shift
in perspective. A Roman numeral immediately identifies the scale-step of
a chord root, but requires some calculation to identify the interval between
two consecutive chord roots. That is, we must already know what the key
is before we can assign Roman numerals to a chord in a given passage.
But it takes some calculation in a mod-7 system to realize that the pro-
gression iii-vi may be expressed as a descending fifth just like V-I. In short,
when chord roots are labelled by numbers, one begins by knowing the
key and then can calculate the interval of root progression.

It is quite the reverse when the fundamental bass is notated as Rameau
did. The intervallic relations among chord roots are easy to see. But to
figure out the scale-step one must first decide on the key, and then figure
out the interval between the chord root and the tonic of that key. As
discussed below, when Rameau dealt with chord progressions, he was
primarily concerned with the intervallic relationship among chord roots.
Only after studying interval successions in the fundamental bass and the
types of chords occurring over these intervallic successions would he decide
on the key. For this reason (and others to be discussed later), many of the
issues Rameau dealt with cannot easily be translated into Roman numeral
notation.

THE SEVENTH CHORD AND DISSONANCE
Rameau offers two possible methods to generate the perfect chord: he
divides a fifth into major and minor thirds (his “official” generation dis-
cussed above), and he stacks two thirds to add up to a perfect fifth. He
applies only the second of these methods to generate the seventh chord,
adding a third above a perfect chord. Such stacking of thirds is a most
problematic generation in that it omits all the care that Rameau exercised
in finding the root intervals over the fundamental when he generated the

perfect chord.
Whatever the problems with his speculative generation of seventh

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 117 ===

chords, Rameau’s extension of the process of inversion to seventh chords
solved a number of major problems concerning dissonance treatment. By
treating 6/5/3, 6/4/3, and 6/4/2 chords as inversions of the seventh chord,
Rameau greatly simplified explanations of how to identify and resolve
several dissonances. For him the chord seventh is always a seventh against
the fundamental, no matter what the inversion. In a 6/5 chord, for instance,
the fifth over the bass is only an apparent consonance; its role in the chord
is dissonant seventh against the fundamental. In the 4/3 chord, the third
is not a consonance but the dissonant chord seventh; the fourth is not a
dissonance needing resolution, but the fundamental note of the chord—
the “irregular fourth” of thoroughbass theory is no longer irregular.

The seventh chord always contains at least one dissonance, the chord
seventh which resolves by descending. When a seventh chord has a major
third (when it is what we call a “dominant-seventh chord”), there is a
second dissonance: the diminished fifth between the third and seventh of
the chord. Because both the chord seventh and the leading tone create
dissonances against other members of the chord, and because they both
must resolve in restricted ways, Rameau calls both of them dissonances.
The chord seventh is the minor dissonance because it arises from a minor
third above the perfect chord and it resolves downwards. The leading tone
(notte sensible) is the major dissonance because it is a major third and
resolves upwards.

With this terminology, Rameau turns triumphantly to Zarlino’s prob-
lematic recommendation that major intervals should ascend and minor
intervals should descend (Part 2, Chapter 5). Rameau interprets Zarlino’s
statement to refer to the major and minor dissonances, no matter the
actual interval over the bass. Thus, even when the minor dissonance
appears as a major second (in a 6/4/2 chord) or as a diminished fifth (in
some 6/5 chords), it remains a minor seventh that descends to resolve. As
noted in Chapter 1 of this study, Zarlino’s remark had been repeated by
many seventeenth-century theorists, who invariably explained that the rule
was unreliable. By finding an interpretation in which it always applied,
Rameau had the best of two worlds: in an almost medieval way he had
taken a puzzling dictum of a revered authority and unraveled its true
meaning; and at the same time he was a true man of the Enlightenment,
using reason to cut through a complex of dissonance rules and enunciate
a single principle.

TONICS AND DOMINANTS

Because the two chord-types (perfect chords and seventh chords) occur
primarily on specific scale degrees, Rameau frequently refers to them by
scale-step location rather than by chord quality. Perfect chords are tonic
chords because they occur on the tonic. And seventh chords are dominant

Rameau’s Early Works

107


=== PAGE 118 ===

108

chords. A dominant (a seventh chord) with a major third and a minor
seventh (what we call a dominant-seventh chord) is a dominant-tonic
chord (dominant of the tonic). All other seventh chords are simple domi-
nants. There is no equivalent for this terminology in modern harmonic
theory, and it makes many of Rameau’s ideas difficult to translate into
Roman-numeral equivalents. In quoted passages and other discussions in
this and the next chapter, whenever there might be a question of Rameau’s
terminology, a modern equivalent is placed in parentheses (as was done
in this paragraph).

CHORDS BY SUBPOSITION
By introducing the seventh chord as a fundamental harmony and extending
to it the principle of chord inversion, Rameau explains the resolution of
thoroughbass figurings 7/5/3, 6/5/3, 6/4/3, and 6/4/2 in terms of a single
chord-type. Numerous other dissonant thoroughbass figurings still awaited
an explanation. Rameau probably had observed similarities between the
resolutions of these dissonances and the two types of dissonances in a
seventh chord. While most suspensions resolve downward, resembling a
minor dissonance or chord seventh, other suspensions resolve upward,
resembling a major dissonance or leading tone. If Rameau could explain
all descending suspensions as minor dissonances (chord sevenths) and all
ascending suspensions as major dissonances (leading tones), the seventh
chord would become the source of all conchordal dissonances.

To turn suspensions into chord sevenths or leading tones, Rameau
placed a new bass a third or a fifth below the fundamental bass of a
seventh chord, generating ninth chords and eleventh chords. A third below
a seventh chord created a ninth chord; a fifth below a seventh chord
created an eleventh chord. Example 4-10 includes four such chords on the
downbeats of measures 2—5. The next-to-lowest staff is the sounding bass.
The lowest staff contains the fundamental bass (the chord roots).

The crucial suspensions resolve as if they were chord sevenths or leading
tones in a seventh chord. In measure 2, the top-voice A-G is a 9-8
suspension over the bass G. Rameau explains that the soprano A resolves
as a seventh over Bb, with the bass G below that Bb. In measures 3 and 4
both the top-voice G and the inner-voice C# resolve normally as chord
seventh and leading tone of an A’ chord despite the fact that the bass in
measure 3 is a third below A and the bass in measure 4 is a fifth below
A. In the penultimate measure, the inner-voice D resolves as if it were a
chord seventh against E. Rameau achieves precisely what he set out to do.
Several different figurings (9/4, 5#, 7#, 4-#) are all shown to be seventh
chords resolving just as they should. The same process can be extended
to other figurings.

Rameau referred to this process by the French term supposition. This

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 119 ===

So  — —=— oto

t +
oo ou j ov oa fe o fe of ote to

Tenor (represents the fundamental bass in chords by subposition)
o—o—| bo _o _|_» 6 -e—-e -e—-e— | e+

7 7 7

Bass (this is the bass of chords by subposition)

ee |

6 9 7 cy
b & 4 '
Fundamental bass be
2 2
os f =< f -S- = or
==
7 7 7 7 7 7 uv
& ‘ U '
r \
= + = -
f—-8 es 8 8 te
i a US
@ rs —o ro. 2 —~S 2 e-
So aa B= 2 oe —S
a. SL 5
' W 8 7
6 7 Zi 5 3 / H
7 ae aS oe q
—e — oe + oe = i
7 u 7 7 7 1 ov
» m3 ‘ ‘ : a

Example 4-10. Rameau 1722, Book 2, Chapter 10

was a new meaning of the term. It is a direct derivation from the Latin
origin of the word: the prefix swb- (meaning below) and positio (participle
of the verb ponere, to place), with double p replacing bp. In the sense that
Rameau uses the term, it quite literally means “to place below,” a meaning
obsolete in the modern English word supposition. Hence, Rameau’s mean-
ing is rendered here by subposition.®

In a chord by subposition, the seventh chord explains the dissonance
while the subposed bass remains separate. The portion of a subposed
chord that is a seventh chord (the upper four notes of a ninth or eleventh

6. Some writers in English retain supposition (Shirlaw 1917), some use sub-position
(Ferris 1959, Wason 1985), and others use subposition (Baker 1988, which presents on
Pp. 27 n. 45 reasoning similar to that given here).

Rameau’s Early Works

109


=== PAGE 120 ===

IIo

chord) can be inverted or rearranged in any manner, just like any seventh
chord. This rearrangement is possible because no matter where the dis-
sonances occur, they will resolve in the same manner. By contrast, the
subposed bass cannot participate in any such rearrangements because,
quite simply, it is not a part of the seventh chord. If it were to participate
in inversions, the resulting chord could end up looking like a scalar col-
lection rather than a harmony; for instance, a C-eleventh chord (C/G-B-
D-F) could be voiced as B-C-D-F-G. These are the reasons for Rameau’s
seemingly arbitrary assertion that since subposed chords exceed the span
of an octave (in his terminology, they are supernumerary), they cannot be
inverted.

Rameau’s delight over his discovery that all descending dissonances
could be explained as chord sevenths and that all ascending dissonances
could be explained as leading tones is understandable. For by extending
seventh chords to chords by subposition, Rameau was now able to explain
the voice leading of nearly every thoroughbass figuring in terms of a perfect
chord or a seventh chord. The few exceptions are the diminished seventh
chord (discussed below) and occasional other chords. It is easy nowadays
to pass over this achievement and see only the problematic areas and
troubling influences of subposed chords. For two centuries now, we have
been sorting out the harmonies of tonal compositions into chords and
nonharmonic tones. But no one had done that before Rameau.

In his enthusiasm, Rameau neglected to state in a prominent position
in the Traité that subposition is essentially a way to explain suspensions.
He does include that information, but only after repeated explanations of
what notes to include in ninth and eleventh chords and why the subposed
bass does not participate in inversions (Book 1, Chapters 6—7; Book 2,
Chapters 10-11; Book 3, Chapters 29-32). Not until the very end of
Book 3, Chapter 31, does Rameau remark that eleventh chords yield
“pleasant suspensions,” and that “Chords by subposition serve only to
suspend [that is, delay] sounds which should be heard naturally.” Similar
remarks appear in Book 3, Chapter 32, where Rameau explains that, as
shown in Example 4-11, “the sounds labeled A suspend [that is, delay]
the sounds labeled B, and the lines designate the natural progression of
the sounds labeled A [that is, the lines show how the notes labeled A
follow their ‘natural’ paths and resolve as members of a seventh chord].””

Rameau’s later works more explicitly relate subposition and suspen-
sions. Chapter 16 of his Generation (1737), on the “Origin of Subposition

7. “Les Sons A, suspendent les Sons B . . .” Rameau uses the verb suspendre in a meaning
that its cognate lacks in English. When we say A suspends B we mean that A holds onto B
longer than B would otherwise last. Rameau means exactly the opposite: that A lasts longer
(is suspended) and delays B. The meaning Rameau imparts to the verb suspendre was used
by other French theorists of the period (Campion 1716, p. 11).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 121 ===

SiSSe

Basso continuo

“a

= &. o oS if

Fundamental bass}

a

o— o-

=

Example 4-11. Rameau 1722, Book 3, Chapter 32

and Suspension,” begins by noting that suspension “is but a consequence”
of subposition. In that chapter and elsewhere, his text explains notes as
suspensions while his fundamental bass illustrates chords by subposition
(Rameau 1737, Chapter 18, Article 1, Part 1; Hayes 1974b, p. 119). Le
Guide du Compositeur, a treatise by Rameau pupil Pietro Gianotti (?—
1765) that is closely based on Rameau’s own unpublished manuscript of
c.1740 (Christensen 1990a), is even more specific about the role of sub-
position: “the suspension has no fundamental bass, and if one gives it
one, it is most frequently done only to see that the suspension takes its
origin from subposition. But since that knowledge serves no purpose in
practice, it is better, upon recognizing the suspended note, to omit it from
consideration and to give to it the fundamental bass that the suspended
consonance [the delayed consonance] should have” (p. 271). Rameau’s
last practical work, the Code of 1761, likewise notes that “the fundamental
is only given to satisfy those who are curious about the source of the
harmony” (Rameau [1761], p. 60).

Some historians have argued that in the Traité, Rameau considered
suspensions as isolated verticalities and modified this position to recognize
the melodic role of suspensions only in later works (Ferris 1959, pp. 232
and 238—239; Cohen 1980, p. 569). But the examples and citations just
introduced make it clear that he always recognized that subposition was
a way of providing a speculative theoretical explanation for the linear
motion of suspensions (Christensen 1987a, pp. 28-32).

Possibly because Rameau did not articulate more clearly the purpose of
subposed chords, many later theorists included absurd collections of
stacked thirds as isolated verticalities, believing they were following Ra-
meau in doing so. By presenting such isolated verticalities, however, these
theorists went against Rameau’s whole purpose in developing his theory
of subposition—to place suspension patterns in a linear context and show
how the suspensions had to resolve.

All this is not to say that Rameau’s theory of subposition is without its
problems. First, if the aim of the fundamental bass is to represent root

Rameau’s Early Works

Itt


=== PAGE 122 ===

112

(gL
oD

N

2

A B

fae 7+ eae

Example 4-12. Delair 1690, fol. DY

progressions, how is it that measures 3 and 4 of Example 4-10, in which
an entire chord must resolve, are akin to measure 5, in which just one
note has to resolve? All three measures are fifth-progressions in Rameau’s
fundamental bass.

A second problem is more critical. Are the subposed chord and the
chord of resolution two separate harmonies, or do they represent a single
harmony? If the latter is the case, does the bass of the subposed chord
anticipate the following harmony, or does it represent the arrival on the
second harmony with the upper voices delayed? In measure 3 of Example
4-10, for instance, does the bass F represent an F harmony, or is F part
of the following D harmony? If the latter is the case, does F anticipate the
D harmony, or does F announce the arrival of the D harmony, stated with
suspensions that resolve into the D harmony?

Although Rameau does not address these questions, evidence points to
contradictory answers. By notating the subposed chord and the chord of
resolution with two separate fundamental basses, he implies they are two
separate harmonies. If this is so, then Rameau was thinking in terms of
thoroughbass, in which a suspension chord and its resolution had separate
figurings. For instance, in an example of suspended notes, Delair makes
no distinction between what modern theory calls a seventh chord (at A),
which requires a change of harmony to resolve, and what modern theory
treats as a single note resolving into a chord already present (at B)—in
each case, there is a “chord of the second” followed by another chord on
another bass pitch (see Example 4-12). Fuxian species counterpoint offers
quite a different perspective, explaining suspensions as delays of a note
within a single harmony. But because of the restraints of the contrapuntal
species, seventh chords hardly ever arise, so Fux does not have to deal
with them.

Other passages in the Traité suggest that Rameau thought of the sub-
posed chord and the chord of resolution as a single harmony. When he
explains that subposed chords “serve only to suspend sounds which should
be heard naturally,” he implies that the subposed bass represents the arrival
on a harmony, and that the upper parts delay their motion into the
remaining notes of that harmony. If that is the case, then Rameau agrees

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 123 ===

Example 4-13. Rameau 1722, Book 3, Chapter 30, mm. 9~—10

with Fux’s notion of suspensions and the modern view of suspensions. In
this stance, he differs with C. P. E. Bach, who regards the voices simul-
taneous with a suspension as anticipations of the following harmony (Bach
1762, Chapter 1; Mitchell 1949, p. 193).

If Rameau intends the main harmonic arrival to occur on the downbeat,
then in effect the subposed bass and the fundamental bass have switched
roles. The fundamental bass, whose purpose it is to explain the underlying
harmony, only shows an elaborating harmony. And the subposed bass,
which Rameau explains as an note added to the chord, shows the essential
harmony.

The point of arrival of the essential harmony is further complicated
because Rameau generally forbids harmonic syncopation in a fundamental
bass (a harmony beginning on a relatively weak metric position and con-
tinuing through the next strong beat; Book 3, Chapter 40).* If a subposed
chord would create syncopated harmonic rhythm, Rameau simply figures
a suspension over the fundamental bass in the manner of a thoroughbass
(see Example 4-13). In the last measure, Rameau analyzes the suspension
as 4-3 over a single chord. To have explained it as a subposed bass would
have given rise to harmonic syncopation in the fundamental bass.

The chord in the last measure is the same harmony labeled as a subposed
chord in measure 5 of Example 4-10. Ironically, it is in Example 4-13 that
explanation as a chord by subposition would make more sense, for there
the preceding harmony actually establishes the D as a dissonant seventh
against E, which dissonance then remains until it resolves on the second
half of the following measure. These two explanations of the same pro-
gression raise the question of where the dominant arrives: on the second

8. Rameau only rarely allows harmonic syncopation in a fundamental bass (Rameau
1722, Book 2, Chapter 17, Article 6; Rameau [1761], p. 5 of examples, “2nd N,” mm.
I-2).

Rameau’s Early Works

113


=== PAGE 124 ===

114

half of the measure (as in m. 5 of Example 4-10) or on the downbeat (as
in m. 2 of Example 4-13)? Rameau does not address the issue.

Despite their problems, these two interpretations demonstrate Rameau’s
desire to have his examples make sense to him as a musician. He opts for
using the thoroughbass notation that he believes is a less satisfactory
theoretical explanation (Example 4-13) to avoid a harmonic syncopation
that is more problematic. (Two other such analyses of 4-3 suspensions
occur in the last example of Book 3, Chapter 38, mm. 14 and 25.) As
Rameau applies it, subposition requires the theorist to study the context
of a suspension to decide how to render it in the fundamental bass. Chord
analysis is not a mechanical task of lining up the vertical notes and stacking
them in thirds to find the root, as it became for some later musicians.

In sum, Rameau’s theory of subposition has many problematic aspects
that Rameau neither answers nor, in some cases, even addresses. But for
him it was an attempt at a single explanation for resolution of all sus-
pended notes, and it did allow him to explain almost all thoroughbass
chords as perfect chords, seventh chords, or their derivatives.

Within a generation, harmonic theorists proposed what has remained
the modern approach to suspensions by distinguishing two fundamentally
different types of suspended notes: chord sevenths that require a change
of root to resolve and suspensions that can resolve into a chord already
present. First suggested by the German theorist Georg Andreas Sorge
(1703-1778) around the middle of the century, the distinction was for-
malized by Kirnberger in the 1770s with the labels essential and incidental
dissonances. This distinction would have been inconceivable without Ra-
meau’s notions of seventh chords and of chord roots.

FOURTHS VS. ELEVENTHS
Just as thoroughbass theory had differentiated the second and ninth by
their resolutions, Rameau believed that fourths should be differentiated
from elevenths (Book 1, Chapter 6; Book 2, Chapter 11; Book 3, Chapter
15). Rameau insists that the fourth is the inversion of a fifth and is a
consonant interval; the eleventh, however, is always a dissonance, a sev-
enth over the fundamental bass in a subposed eleventh chord. However,
when he notates 4-3 suspensions, he uses the standard numbering and
not II-Io.

THE DIMINISHED SEVENTH CHORD

Rameau explains that the diminished seventh chord arises by borrowing
(par emprunt) when the sixth scale degree in minor replaces the root of a
dominant seventh chord (F-G#-B-D instead of E-G#-B-D; Book 1, Chapter
8, Article 7; Book 2, Chapter 12; Book 3, Chapter 33). He calls it the
chord of the augmented second, not a type of “diminished chord,” reflect-

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 125 ===

ing the fact that E, not G#, is the fundamental bass. By deriving the
diminished seventh from the dominant seventh, Rameau formalized ob-
servations other theorists had made about the interchangeability of these
chords in many cases (Campion 1716, p. 11; cited here in Ex. 3-19, note
12).

In later works, Rameau is ambivalent about the fundamental bass of
the diminished seventh chord, but he always recognizes it as a harmony
parallel in function to the dominant seventh. In his last discussion, he
explains that in “the chord of minor thirds” (l’accord de petites tierces)
the leading tone is an “implied [censée] fundamental . . . and the rules
given regarding that note as well as its chord [the “leading tone chord”
or l’accord sensible, synonymous with the “dominant-tonic”] do not vary
in the slightest; it is always the leading-tone chord, that which carries the
dominant-tonic, in which its [the dominant’s] upper semitone is substi-
tuted” (Rameau [1761], p. 65).

Chord Successions

Having established that two fundamental chord-types, the perfect chord
and the seventh chord, were the basis of all harmonies, Rameau was now
able for the very first time to consider the nature of harmonic succession.
The issues he dealt with go to the heart of musical structure and have
remained the focus of much music theory since his time. What is the nature
of chord successions, both local and long-range? What different kinds of
harmonic connections are there? Are all chords in a progression of equal
harmonic weight? How do we know when a progression comes to an end?
And how does the vertical dimension (the structure of simultaneities) in
music relate to the horizontal (the progression of simultaneities)?

CHORD-TO-CHORD SUCCESSIONS

For Rameau, the nature of harmonic successions depends on the intervals
in the fundamental bass. Rameau posits a close relationship between the
structure of harmonies and their connection from one to another, arguing
that the very intervals contained in chords connect one chord to another
(Book 2, Chapter 1; discussed in Lewin 1978). Thus the fundamental bass
should move by perfect fifths and thirds, the two intervals in the perfect
chord. In his later works, Rameau attempted to demonstrate that all
fundamental-bass successions were by fifths or thirds. But in the Traité,
he notes that dissonances and license (a concept he uses when his theory
becomes too restrictive) allow the fundamental bass to move by second.
As a result, the fundamental bass can move by any interval.

Rameau’s Early Works

II5


=== PAGE 126 ===

116

Added sixth Major third

e <x
6
Fifth
x =
5
a= e-
6
Fundamental bass. 5
Fourth note. Tonic
e-
1

6
5

Example 4-14. Rameau 1722, Book 2, Chapter 7

CADENCES
Not all these successions are of equal structural import. Most important
are cadences (Book 2, Chapters 5—9), a term Rameau uses to denote a
type of harmonic progression, not just the concluding motion of a phrase.
Rameau is not as explicit about this definition as is his pupil Jean Laurent
de Béthizy (1709-1781): “cadence in general signifies the passage from
one note to another note which is over a different fundamental than that
to which the first note belongs” (Béthizy 1754, p. 173).

There are two basic types of cadences, each with its own characteristic
dissonance. The perfect cadence is a motion down by fifth (from dominant
to tonic) in which the first harmony is a seventh chord whose urge to
resolve propels the progression. The irregular cadence is a motion up by
fifth (from tonic to dominant, or from the fourth scale step to the tonic).?
The first harmony in an irregular cadence contains a special dissonance—
an added sixth—whose urge to resolve propels the progression (see Ex-
ample 4-14). This added-sixth chord is equivalent in pitch to a D-minor
seventh chord. But Rameau explains that the fundamental bass of this
chord is F. The D is a dissonance added to the perfect chord, a type of
major dissonance that must rise to resolve.

Rameau uses his added-sixth chord to explain a progression from the
1699 composition treatise of Charles Masson (?-?). Masson used the
example (4-15) to illustrate the use of the tritone approaching a cadence.
Rameau omits the bracketed portion of Masson’s example. Since Rameau
views the 6/4 chord as a tonic chord, he cannot regard the alto G as a

g. In later works, Rameau also uses the term imperfect cadence to refer to progressions

up a fifth (Rameau 1737, Chapter 6, Article 7). The modern term plagal cadence appeared
around the turn of the nineteenth century (Catel 1802, p. 34).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 127 ===

—
Masson's F

example:

hi
\t
9
a
ae

Pe

Rameau’s
fundamental
bass:

8]
uo! Wt

Example 4-15. Masson 1699, p. 99; Rameau 1722, Book 2, Chapter 7.
Rameau omits the bracketed portion of Masson’s example.

chord seventh because it does not resolve as a seventh. If the G is not a
chord seventh, the A must be the added note, a sixth above the funda-
mental bass. On his terms, Rameau is consistent. But in terms of the entire
progression, his interpretation is clearly problematic. In his later works,
beginning with the manuscript treatise L’art de la basse fondamentale (c.
1740), Rameau changed his mind, and henceforth viewed the cadential
6/4 as a pair of suspensions over the dominant (Rameau [1761], p. 54).

Though the example of an added sixth that he uses comes from Masson
1699, Rameau may have gotten the idea for this chord from Delair 1690,
which he deemed the most praiseworthy thoroughbass method (Rameau
CTW 1, p. 19; Rameau 1732, p. 5; Hayes 19742, p. 7). Delair recommends
that when perfect chords descend by a fifth the player should add a seventh
after the first chord, and when perfect chords rise by a fifth, the player
should add a sixth after the first chord (fol. H’) (see Example 4-16). Delair
offered this as a suggestion. But Rameau developed these added disso-
nances into a general principle of harmonic progression.

A FUNCTIONAL ROLE FOR DISSONANCES AND A THEORY OF
HARMONIC CONTINUITY

By using the characteristic dissonances of each cadence as part of the
explanation for the harmonic drive of the progression, Rameau takes an

aiid idLd RAIA
= SS eee

Example 4-16. Delair 1690, fol. H"

Rameau’s Early Works

117


=== PAGE 128 ===

118

old idea and gives it a wider application. The notion of moving from
imperfection to perfection had long figured in explanations of cadences
(dissonances and imperfect consonances to a perfect consonance). Indeed,
Tinctoris and others called cadences perfections. Rameau extended this
notion to all chord progressions within a phrase. If two notes of the
fundamental bass both “bore a perfect chord, the mind, not desiring
anything more after such a chord, would be uncertain upon which of these
two sounds to rest. Dissonance seems needed here in order that its harsh-
ness should make the listener desire the rest which follows” (Book 2,
Chapter 2). “Far from dissonance being an embarrassment in composition,
it facilitates its course” (Book 3, Chapter 7; extended discussion in Rameau
1726, Chapter 11). For Rameau, a chord with a consonance is a tonic;
only dissonances can disturb its implication of a point of repose. In later
writings, Rameau expanded this functional role of dissonance into a com-
prehensive explanation for chordal connections and the placement of
chords within a key. Even if the dissonances were not actually present,
Rameau argued that they were implied. Since Rameau developed these
ideas much more fully in later works, they are discussed in Chapter 5.

With perfect and irregular cadences and their characteristic dissonances
as models for directed harmonic motion leading to a conclusion, Rameau
asks why it is that harmonic motion does not continually halt every time
the fundamental bass falls or rises by a fifth. To answer this question, he
turns to Zarlino’s notion of cadential evasion as a means of extending the
span of musical motion. This tenet recurs in numerous seventeenth and
early eighteenth-century writings (Werckmeister 1702, pp. 50-51; Bros-
sard 1703, article motivo). Rameau reworks the idea from his harmonic
perspective.

Complete cadences can be evaded by inverting one or both chords in a
progression (Book 2, Chapter 8), by adding a dissonance to a consonant
chord of arrival, thereby requiring the new dissonance to resolve, or by
making the third of a dominant-tonic chord (a dominant-seventh chord)
minor so that the chord lacks the power of making the next chord into a
tonic (Book 2, Chapter 9). Or a perfect cadence can be avoided entirely
by having the dominant resolve up a step to form a broken cadence
(cadence rompué), what we call a deceptive cadence (Book 2, Chapter 6).

Taken together, Rameau’s notion of characteristic dissonances on all
chords that are not tonic chords and his notion of harmonic successions
as a series of continually evaded cadences is the first attempt to explain
the sense of continuing motion created by harmonic successions. But it is
inadequate for three reasons. First, it assumes a one-to-one relation be-
tween consonance and tonal stability. In effect, Rameau argues that a
consonant chord is a tonic and therefore if we know it is not a conclusive
tonic, it must be because we hear a dissonance (a chord seventh or added

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth-Century


=== PAGE 129 ===

1 = = 7
2 oar o- —
a——e ———s  —
a Lex
| “1 1
6 6 6 6 6 6 6
Fundamental bass
iG a = :
mel = Le }
e S o——_ a
7] 7 7 6 7

Example 4-17. Rameau 1722, Book 2, Chapter 17, Article 2

sixth), whether actual or implied. Surely there are factors other than
consonance that make a chord a convincing tonic.

Second, Rameau’s explanation is a point-to-point approach. It assumes
that we hear a continuous phrase as a series of short motions that are
continually prevented from coming to a conclusion by an added dissonance
or an irregular voice leading.

Third, Rameau’s cadence-oriented harmonic progressions are incapable
of dealing with progressions where the root movement does not at all
resemble a cadence. In Example 4-17 the contorted fundamental bass
under a series of stepwise sixth chords speaks for itself. Basically, since
this progression is not modeled on root progressions by fifth, Rameau
cannot explain its origin. He does not condemn the progression; he just
cannot fit it into his cadence-oriented notion of harmony. When he referred
to this progression in 1737, he virtually admitted that he could not explain
it: “the sole exception to our general rules [of harmonic succession] . . .
is the ability to have several tonics [perfect chords] immediately following
one another where there is no connection among them; this is only done
in inversion” (Rameau 1737, p. 189). It seems never to have occurred to
him that harmonies could relate to one another in meaningful ways other
than in terms of cadential progressions or their imitation.

LARGE-SCALE HARMONIC PROGRESSIONS WITHIN A KEY

As in contemporary counterpoint or thoroughbass manuals, most discus-
sions in the Traité concern connections between consecutive harmonies or
even within a single harmony (as with suspensions explained by subposed
chords). Only occasionally does Rameau study a larger context, as when
he recasts into his own terms a common rule for unfigured basses. Instead
of stating that the bass should carry a 6/3 chord when moving by third to
or from a perfect chord, Rameau extends the rule to refer to longer-range
motions involving these notes, not only to local skips by a third: “All
notes found a third above or below the tonic or the dominant [these being

Rameau’s Early Works

I19


=== PAGE 130 ===

I20

2
= ee _ 2 eS. Ss
= a : a
+ * + * + * + *
Q. 2 o e
—— = = =
G25 6 6 6) 6 ot

5

Example 4-18. Rameau 1722, Book 3, Chapter 11. The symbols * and +
replace Rameau’s clumsy letter-identifications.

SS

Basso continuo g a 6

ca

Fundamental bass
a4 7
=

Example 4-19. Rameau 1722, Book 3, Chapter 41, mm. 1-4

the only scale steps that Rameau believes merit perfect chords] should
bear sixth chords, when the progression of the bass leads to one of these
two notes” (Book 3, Chapter 11; emphasis added) (see Example 4-18).!°
Rameau explains that the asterisked notes require a triad and are goals,
so that those chords with + use sixth chords. By implication, the remaining
harmonies “lead to” these notes.

Another discussion involving larger contexts occurs in Book 3, Chapter
41, “How to Compose a Basso Continuo below a Treble.” His example,
one of the few resembling an actual composition, opens with the phrase
shown in Example 4-19.

“In the first and second measures of the fundamental bass, there are
two equal progressions [tonic to dominant]. I reserve the progression most
closely related to the cadence [that is, the progression in root position] for
the second measure, because this is where the cadence occurs normally
[that is, on a downbeat]; notice that the cadence is irregular here and
perfect in the fourth measure.” This discussion touches on the roles of
various types of harmonic progressions within phrases: when to use root-

10. On the downbeat of measure 3, Rameau has E in the upper voice; this is emended
to agree with the figuring. Rameau does not mention the parallel fifths between measures
3 and 4.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 131 ===

o>
p
Fo
i}
po

F G H J
= a = =
L M N P
a us = =x
2 |

Fundamental bass

Example 4-20. Rameau 1726, p. 68

position chords versus inverted chords, and when to use irregular versus
perfect cadences.

But Rameau never addresses this issue comprehensively as some theorists
later in the century were to do (especially Koch). His primary interest is
in the local function of harmonies and the way those local movements
add up to a larger phrase. Consider his explanation of the progression in
Example 4-20, from the Nouveau systéme:

Suppose that the key of G is announced at L [because a perfect chord appears
there] and that one wished to continue [in that key]; the A (note M), as a
fundamental, should support the seventh in its harmony, and then the same
dissonance should exist in all the chords until that of the principal sound [or
tonic]. The connection begins from A to B where the seventh B is prepared
by A; then this seventh is resolved at C so that the connection is evident in
the three successive chords which include A, B, and C; and C as the leading
tone creates the desire for D. While on the one hand the connection ends at
C, there begins another at G which prepares the seventh H, which seventh
then resolves at J.

Accordingly, the keys of fundamental sounds M and N can never seem
permanent keys, and the key of L or P is always present. (p. 69, Rameau’s
emphases)

Despite his emphasis on chord-to-chord successions here, Rameau does
deal with how a key is expressed, how consonance and dissonance con-
tribute to this, and how various voice-leading patterns interlock until the
cadence of this “harmonic phrase of the octave” (as Clement 1758, p. 9,
refers to this pattern). His discussion predicates the concepts of interval-
roots and chord-roots for triads and seventh chords, the notion of a
discrete number of chord-types, the functional placement of those har-
monies on different scale degrees, the key-defining roles of consonance
and dissonance, and the notion of harmonies fulfilling their roles between
key-defining chords—all theoretical issues introduced by Rameau. No

Rameau’s Early Works

121


=== PAGE 132 ===

122

other school of early eighteenth-century theory was even aware of most
of these issues.

Practical Applications

As Rameau notes in his preface, Books 3 and 4 of the Traité (on compo-
sition and accompaniment) are more practical than Books 1 and 2. Both
owe much to thoroughbass. Like that approach, Rameau starts instruction
with four-voice writing, and is always more concerned with the structure
of the bass and the chords built upon the bass than with the melodic
construction of the upper voices. Unlike contemporaneous thoroughbass
methods, Rameau’s theory is based on perfect chords, seventh chords, and
their interaction. Book 3 recapitulates much of the material in Books 1
and 2, but without the speculative (mathematical) bases and many of the
arguments. It begins with the fundamental bass, triads, seventh chords,
and chord progressions, applying these materials to compositional situa-
tions. In explaining which chords belong on which scale steps, for instance,
Rameau does not simply list the figuring of those chords, as Heinichen or
any of the other thoroughbass theorists dealing with unfigured basses do.
Instead, he discusses the chords and their inversions (Book 3, Chapter 9),
drawing parallels between different progressions that share fundamental-
bass motions. He draws one such comparison between what we call ii$-V
and V%-I, showing that in both cases the fundamental bass descends a fifth
and the first chord moves to a triadic goal (see Example 4-21). This leads
to his explanation of a secondary-dominant function:

The composer is thus free to make the bass proceed by a tone or by a
semitone, even if he should be in a key in which the semitone is not appro-
priate; for since the dominant can be treated as a tonic note [in that it can
support a perfect chord], it may be approached using all those sounds which

naturally precede a tonic note. . . It is by means of the difference between
the progression of a tone and a semitone ascending to the note bearing the
perfect chord that we differentiate a dominant and a tonic note... [But]
i t—#
=
3 oe <x fo x
6 5

5

Fourth Dominant Leading Tonic
note tone note

Example 4-21. Rameau 1722, Book 3, Chapter 11

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 133 ===

even if this progression of a semitone is used, thus giving a dominant all the
attributes of a tonic note, we may still continue after this dominant (which
would then appear to be a tonic note) in the original key. (Book 3, Chapter
11)

Practical concerns notwithstanding, Rameau’s discussion of composition
in much of Book 3 remains largely theoretical. Not until Chapter 35 is
there an example of “real” music, as opposed to a schematic representation
of a harmonic progression in whole notes.

The situation is similar in Book 4 on accompaniment (thoroughbass).
Rameau covers most of the materials found in the more complete tho-
roughbass manuals, but in a new ordering, and with new emphases. He
begins with the perfect chord and seventh chord and their inversions and
repeatedly relates all figurings to those basic harmonies and their
progressions.

Harmony vs. Melody

One of the major controversies surrounding Rameau’s approach to music
concerns his belief that harmony is the source of melody. Since Johann
Mattheson (1681-1764) in the 1730s, Rameau’s opponents have read this
as a slogan denying the melodic element in music. Indeed, nearly every
eighteenth-century writer had something to say on the primacy of melody
vs. harmony. From the beginning, much of the controversy concerning
Rameau’s stance has been over statements taken out of context and out-
right misunderstandings. It may well be that Mattheson, for instance,
misread Rameau, and thought that Rameau was promoting the stile antico
and denigrating galant melody (Rameau CTW 3, xxxi-xxxiv). As com-
poser and theorist Rameau was fully aware of the importance of melody.
Just like Fux, Rameau urges that in a successful piece “each part should
have a flowing and graceful melody” (Rameau 1722, Book 3, Chapter
43). Also like Fux in Gradus (and unlike authors of thoroughbass man-
uals), Rameau frequently writes his musical examples on multiple staffs,
emphasizing the propriety of each voice. In practical discussions, Rameau
repeatedly suggests that one might begin composing by writing a melody
(Rameau 1722, Book 2, Chapter 28, and Book 3, Chapter 40; Rameau
1737, Chapter 18; Rameau [1761], Chapter 8). In recurring discussions of
chord progressions, Rameau explains how the propriety of various types
of harmonic motions depends upon their placement within a well-con-
structed phrase.

But for Rameau these are all practical considerations, none of which
are capable of indicating to him that melody is supreme. From his theo-
retical perspective, musicians are wrong when they believe

Rameau’s Early Works

123


=== PAGE 134 ===

124

that harmony arises from melody since the melodies produced by each voice
come together to form the harmony. It is first necessary, however, to find a
course for each voice which will permit them all to harmonize well together.
No matter what melodic progression is used for each individual part, the
voices will join together to form a good harmony only with great difficulty,
if indeed at all, unless the progressions are dictated by the rules of harmony.
(Rameau 1722, Book 2, Chapter 19)

Read in this context, Rameau’s reasoning is akin to Fux’s explanation of
how the melodies in a multi-part counterpoint exercise interact to connect
the notes of one triad to another.

Rameau also came to believe that the source of melodic expression lay
not in a melody, but in the underlying harmonic progressions. As proof,
he illustrates seventy-nine different harmonic progressions supporting the
ascending melodic fourth G-C, arguing that each imparts a different affect
to the melodic interval (Rameau 1726, Chapter 8). In the Traité, Rameau
had not been so entirely convinced that expression was so dependent upon
harmony: “Melody has no less expressive force than harmony, but giving
definite rules for its use is almost impossible, since good taste plays a
greater part in this than anything else. We shall leave to privileged geniuses
the pleasure of distinguishing themselves in this domain on which depends
almost all the strength of sentiment” (Rameau 1722, Book 2, Chapter 20).

Some of the heated polemic over the primacy of harmony and melody
died down by the end of the century. Heinrich Christoph Koch (1749—-
1816), the most important theorist of the last two decades of the century,
probably summed it up the best by insisting that both melody and harmony
were fully complementary. For him, the best melody was “melody con-
ceived harmonically.”

Rameau’s Achievements in the Traité

In his Traité, Rameau introduced a harmonic theory capable of explaining
simultaneities and voice leading in contemporary music. Though he was
an innovator and not a theorist contributing to a long tradition (like Fux
and Heinichen, for instance), his works were taken under consideration
throughout Europe even during the 1720s. In France, Pére Louis Bertrand
Castel (1688-1757), at that time Rameau’s friend, wrote about the influ-
ence of the Traité in 1728: “Its success surpassed the hopes of the author
. .. The public has ratified the new system . . . It is uncommon to see a
somewhat superior system, when it is still new, overcome old prejudice
and routine in such a short time” (Castel 1728, pp. 472-473). Castel took
note of some resistance to his ideas—but certainly Rameau was not being
ignored. In Germany, Christoph Gottlob Schréter (1699-1782) reports
that he studied the Traité in Jena in 1724 with his teacher Johann Nicolaus

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 135 ===

7 & 6 47 +

eS Se =

Example 4-22. Kellner 1732, p. 86, ex. 1

» rao

Hee

Bach (1669~-1753), one of Johann Sebastian’s cousins (Schréter 1772,
p. x). Heinichen’s Der Generalbass (1728) cites Rameau in several pas-
sages, and it is likely that he derived his ideas on triadic and seventh-
chord inversions from the Traité. Considering that references to the Traité
all occur in late additions to this book, it is significant that Heinichen cites
Rameau’s new work almost as much as any other work on thoroughbass.
In Sweden, two dissertations at the University of Uppsala in 1727 and
1728 acknowledged the Traité (Westbladh 1727 and Lofgrén 1728, nei-
ther of which is musically sophisticated).

An indication of the extent to which Rameau’s understanding of chords,
inversions, and progressions were rapidly incorporated into common un-
derstanding is found in the 1732 thoroughbass manual of David Kellner
(c. 1670-1748), probably the best-seller among such works for the re-
mainder of the century with numerous reprints and translations. It is a
relatively short work, explaining matters simply, borrowing freely though
without acknowledgement from Heinichen’s voluminous work of 1728.
The subject of inversions comes up in the seventh and last chapter, which
deals with dissonances in a traditional thoroughbass manner. At the end
of the chapter, Kellner treats situations where dissonances succeed one
another. Following Heinichen, and adopting two of his three examples,!!
Kellner explains that such situations often involve an inversion or re-
arrangement (Umwendung) of the dissonant harmony (see Example 4-22).
“In the first example is D with 6/4+/2; then, in the notes over the following
Gh, the dissonance is only rearranged; and because after the first D the
resolution should be C-E-A, this very harmony then follows over the third
note, for the chord A-C-E is only a rearrangement of C-E-A” (p. 86).
Kellner then notes that such situations usually involve four types of seventh
chords, each of which can occur in three inversions (see Example 4-23).
This is introduced with no fanfare or any suggestion (as with Heinichen’s
explanation of inversions) that this is a new or experimental idea. It is
significant that Kellner lists the root-position chord first. Heinichen had
begun his listing of inversions with different forms: from the chord of the
second (D-E-G#-B), the chord of the diminished fifth (E-C-G-Bb), and the

11. The first two examples on p. 86 (1732 edition) in Kellner are derived from Heinichen
1728, pp. 625 (first example) and 627 (first example).

Rameau’s Early Works

125


=== PAGE 136 ===

126

— the =

7
'

ye

6
% a
3 2

Example 4-23. Kellner 1732, pp. 86-87; scored from tablature,
with minor errors emended

chord of the diminished seventh (G#-B-D-F) (Heinichen 1728, pp. 624—
625).

Kellner’s presentation offers seventh chords and their inversions as basic
harmonies and the notion that the progression from one harmony to
another is essentially the same no matter what position the chords appear
in. In this manner, Rameau’s ideas began to permeate general musical
discourse. They answered a need among musicians for a new way of
organizing and explaining harmonies and their successions. Fuxian coun-
terpoint was capable of dealing with some aspects of musical structure,
but Fux’s own inability to deal with relatively simple harmonies in the
recitative cited in Example 2-7 demonstrate the inadequacy of that ap-
proach in explaining modern harmony. Musicians also sought respite from
the burgeoning harmonies, rules, and exceptions of contemporary tho-
roughbass manuals. By reducing all harmonies to triads and seventh chords
with or without added notes, and by explaining all successions among
these harmonies in terms of fundamental-bass progressions, Rameau
pointed the way out of the difficulties of counterpoint and thoroughbass.
The theoretical battles involving Rameau and others later in the century
generally took place not over whether to accept the inversions of triads
and seventh chords, the notion of chord roots, and the concept of harmonic
progressions, but how best to explain these concepts and put them into

use.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 137 ===

Sie eee se

CE ok SP

Rameau’s Later Works
and Controversies

Music is a physico-mathematical science; sound is its physical object,
and the ratios found between different sounds constitute its mathemati-
cal object.

Rameau 1737, Chapter 2

Rameau as Scientist

The ink had hardly dried on the Traité when Rameau became aware of a
powerful idea that was to shape his speculative theories for the remainder
of his life. In an extended review of the Traité, Pére Louis Bertrand Castel
(1688~1757) cited acoustical research by the Jesuit philosopher, mathe-
matician, and scientist Ignace Gaston Pardies (1636-1673) and the phys-
icist Joseph Sauveur (1653-1716) proving that the very consonances Ra-
meau had painstakingly demonstrated by string divisions to arise over the
fundamental—the octave, twelfth, and major seventeenth (compound ma-
jor third)—were audible in the resonance of a vibrating string. It appeared,
as Castel put it, that “Nature gives us the same system that M. Rameau
discovered in numbers” (Castel 1722, pp. 1733-1734).

It is difficult for us in the twentieth century to imagine the effect of this
revelation on Rameau. In 1722, the foundation of science was not a
relatively ancient history of accepted facts, as it is to us. Descartes (1596—
1650), who had elevated rational examination over accepted authority,
was still a living memory during Rameau’s youth. And Isaac Newton
(1642-1727) was the towering giant of recent science—as Voltaire said
of Newton, “We are all his disciples now.” The perspectives opened by
Descartes and Newton were yielding new discoveries at an ever-increasing
pace. And unlike much modern science in which it is difficult for a layman


=== PAGE 138 ===

128

even to follow the latest advances, many educated persons in the eighteenth
century could and often did contribute to the advance of science because
of the fundamental nature of many of the new discoveries.

In the Traité, Rameau had been the Descartes of music, searching for
first principles and deducing the place of musical knowledge in an orderly
system. Now, living in Paris, one of the capitals of the new scientific age,
Rameau also became the Newton of music. He continued to insist that
rules must be based on first principles. But now those principles had to be
based on empirical fact. His foundation is no longer string divisions, but
the resonating string—the corps sonore (sonorous body). The basic inter-
vals are no longer merely related to a fundamental note, they are actually
generated by that fundamental because they physically sound along with
it.

Even the titles of Rameau’s next works reflect his changed perspective.
Nouveau Systéme (1726), which acknowledges many new aspects of his
scientific approach, pays homage to the 1701 report on Sauveur’s acoust-
ical ideas to the French Royal Academy of Sciences: “Sur un nouveau
systéme de musique” (Fontenelle 1707). The treatise that fully sets forth
Rameau’s new perspective is entitled Harmonic Generation (Generation
harmonique, 1737; foreshadowed by Chapter 3 in Rameau 1726: “On
the generation of chords and all intervals”). Rameau confidently dismisses
traditional discussions of string divisions and mathematical operations,
replacing them with a series of scientific experiments demonstrating mat-
ters of acoustics and even the physiology of hearing (Rameau 1737, preface
and Chapter 1). Proposition 12, for instance, deals with the construction
of the cochlea and the manner in which it transmits sounds to the brain.
In short, Rameau separated musica teorica from its ancient mathematical
basis and made the physical properties of sound the basis of speculative
music theory.

The corps sonore gave Rameau an unchanging physical source to replace
the manipulable numbers arising from string divisions. But it did not solve
the problems he had earlier, such as the origin of the minor third. In fact,
it made these problems more serious. No longer able to juggle numbers
to generate the minor third, Rameau now had to face its absence over the
fundamental as a physical fact of harmonic resonance. But this did not
stop him from proposing new generations, some of which were based on
acoustical errors.

For instance, one experiment in the Generation deals with sympathetic
vibration. Rameau correctly notes that a vibrating string causes other
strings tuned a twelfth and a major seventeenth lower to vibrate sympa-

1. Duchez 1986 and Christensen 1987a, 1987b, and 1993 discuss Rameau and science
in greater detail.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 139 ===

— Cis jn harmonic series
of Ap and of F. Hence , “

C vibrates sympathetically
with AD and F.

Example 5-1.

thetically. But he mistakenly believed that these lower strings vibrated in
their entire lengths, not in thirds and fifths, respectively. This error led
him to posit an origin for the minor perfect chord out of the resonances
of these lower strings (see Example 5-1). Rameau recognized his acoustic
error in the Démonstration (1750), but still insisted on this downward
generation of the minor perfect chord, conceding only that it was merely
“indicated by nature” instead of being actually present (Rameau 1750,
pp. 24, 63). Had Rameau tuned sympathetically vibrating strings to other
intervals, he could have shown just as easily that many any other combi-
nations of tones were likewise “indicated by nature.”

Such logical or factual lapses are less important than Rameau’s failure
to address the implications of downward generation of the minor triad.
He certainly does not want to argue that the upper note of the minor triad
is its generator or root with all the absurdities that entails (as in Riemann
1893). In fact, Rameau had previously rejected Zarlino’s downward ex-
planation of the minor triad in part because of such difficulties (Rameau
1722, Book 1, Chapter 4). Rameau also does not want F minor to be the
relative minor of C major. So later in the Démonstration, he came up with
yet another generation of minor, arguing that the chord A-C-E has two
generators: A-E yields the perfect fifth and C-E the major third (Rameau
1750, pp. 69ff.). This implies that the minor perfect chord has two roots,
its fundamental bass (A, root of the fifth A-E) and its third (C, root of the
third C-E). Rameau neither recognizes that implication nor explains why
the minor chord, functionally equivalent to the major chord, should have
such a different generation.

Chapter 4 has already taken note of the fallacies of attempting to find
any particular system of music in mathematics or natural resonance. It
merits repetition here that none of the problems Rameau has in generating
the minor perfect chord affect how he explains its use. No matter which
generation he uses in a given work, the minor perfect chord, like major,
is a single harmonic unit with its lowest tone the fundamental bass.

Other acoustical errors in Chapter 1 of the Generation do not affect

the practical side of his theorizing but do illuminate his powerful desire .

to find in Nature via the corps sonore a model for his view of music. For
instance, in order to find only consonances in the resonance of a string,

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

129


=== PAGE 140 ===

130

he plaintively suggests that the note created by one-seventh of a string is
so weak “that it could not conceivably be heard if it were not pointed
out; thus perhaps it will always escape you” (Rameau 1737, Chapter 1,
Experiment 3). In fact, the relative loudness of any harmonic depends on
the construction of the vibrating string and on how and where it is set in
motion. Despite Rameau’s hope, it may not in fact “always escape you.”
He also insists that harmonic resonance exists “in the resonance of every
sonorous body, such as a sound of our voice, of a string, of a tube, of a
bell, and so forth” (Rameau 1754, p. 2). In fact, only physical systems
vibrating with one degree of freedom, such as air columns and strings,
regularly yield the harmonic series.

To judge from surviving anecdotes, Rameau must have been somewhat
exasperating with his insistence on the corps sonore as a universal phe-
nomenon. The Encyclopedist Denis Diderot (1713-1784) has the protag-
onist in his novel Rameau’s Nephew describe how the theorist stalked the
streets of Paris listening for harmonic resonance in church bells. And one
M. Boisgelow reportedly took Rameau to a pond full of croaking frogs to
point out that “this is in nature as much as is your system of fundamental
bass” (Choron-Fayolle 1810-1811, Vol. 2, p. 197; Keane 1961, p. 49).

Modern scholars, viewing Rameau’s acoustic errors and changing opin-
ions on acoustic facts, often portray him as a scientific dilettante who
desperately searched for validation of his speculative ideas. But according
to Christensen 1987b, the first study to correlate Rameau’s acoustic as-
sertions with the rapidly evolving science of the time, Rameau in fact
“accurately reported much of the most progressive scientific research of
his day” (p. 24). It took a long time for scientists and mathematicians to
show how it was possible for multiple sounds to arise in a single vibrating
column and to explain how sound waves traveled through the air and
how we perceive them.

As a result, some of the polemic in which Rameau engaged concerned
disputes over what we regard as scientific fact, but what the eighteenth
century saw as questionable conclusions of a new science. For instance,
Rameau’s adversary in 1729-1731 argues that “a vibrating body . . . only
causes the three different sounds of the perfect chord to be heard by
accident, as, for example, when it has been overly forced [trop-forcé|”
(Rameau 1729-1731, p. 2370; original emphases). Furthermore, many
prominent musicians remained unaware of the implications of harmonic
resonance. As learned a musical scholar as Johann Gottfried Walther
(1684-1748), for instance, did not mention resonance in the article on
Sauveur in his 1732 Lexicon.

Regardless of the speculative or scientific problems Rameau encoun-
tered, what is of greatest significance is that he (and many later musicians)

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 141 ===

now believed that the harmonic series, hitherto deemed primarily the
abstract result of string divisions and numerology, was in fact audible in
sound. To use one of the catchwords of the eighteenth century, these
intervals occur in Nature, and Nature gives us the ability to perceive them.

Innovations in Harmonic Theory

Apparently at the suggestion of Castel (Rameau CTW 3, p. xxv), Rameau
published in 1726 the second of his treatises “to serve as an introduction
to the Traité de l’harmonie” (title page). Some of the chapters in the
Nouveau systéme are indeed glosses on ideas in the Traité. But in this
work and his Dissertation of 1732, which deals mostly with accompani-
ment, there are also important innovations, as well as analyses of classic
compositions of the time. He analyzes a monologue from Lully’s Armide
(Rameau 1726, Chapter 20).? He also discusses the figuring of the bass
part in Corelli’s opus 5 sonatas (Rameau 1726, Chapter 23; English
translation in Appendix 2) and presents his tablature of an accompaniment
to one movement of these sonatas (Rameau 1732; discussion and a real-
ization in Hayes 1974c).3 Yet neither the Nouveau systéme nor the Dis-
sertation was designed as a comprehensive picture of his new perspectives.

To present his new ideas in a work comparable to the Traité, he pub-
lished the Generation harmonique in 1737. This work marks the end of
the development of Rameau’s practical theories in most matters concerning
harmony and composition. Although he published more than half his
writings on music theory after 1737, discussed some of his practical ideas
with more clarity within his later works, continued to change various
aspects of his speculative ideas, and engaged in seemingly endless polemic
over many of his ideas, most of his practical ideas appear in the Generation
in their final formulation.

Much of the practical foundation laid out in the Traité remains in the
Generation and later works. The major and minor perfect chords are the
source of consonant harmony; the seventh chord is the source of dissonant
harmony (including chords by subposition and added-sixth chords). Ca-
dences are the models for chord progressions, and imitated and evaded
cadences explain harmonic continuity. Many of the new tenets added to
this foundation -had already appeared in some form in the Traité, but
without a clear vocabulary or else without explicit discussion.

2. Rameau re-analyzed this recitative in a different manner in Rameau 1754. Verba 1973
discusses both analyses insightfully.
3. The fundamental bass in this realization is by Hayes.

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

131


=== PAGE 142 ===

132

THE SUBDOMINANT

The most important innovation is the added prominence accorded the
fourth scale degree and the more comprehensive approach to chord pro-
gressions resulting from this. In the Traité, Rameau recognizes two prin-
cipal cadences as models for all chord progressions: the perfect cadence
or fundamental-bass motion down by a fifth, and the irregular cadence
(also called the imperfect cadence in the Generation) or fundamental-bass
motion up by a fifth. In each, a dissonant chord (seventh chord or added-
sixth chord) progresses to a perfect chord. Rameau highlights the status
of the two chords in the perfect cadence by using the terms dominant and
tonic to refer not only to the scale degrees on which the chords are built
but also to the quality of the chords themselves. Dominant had been used
in French theory to refer to the fifth scale degree since the early seventeenth
century, and tonic had appeared in print for the first time in St. Lambert
1707 as a synonym for the final of the mode. Rameau has no such name
for scale-step 4 or its dissonant chord in the imperfect cadence.

In the Nouveau systéme, Rameau adopts the name subdominant (sous-
dominante; apparently coined as soudominante in Dandrieu c. 1719) to
refer to scale-step 4 as well as the added-sixth chord built there. Whereas
Jean-Frangios Dandrieu (c. 1682-1738) probably intended the prefix sub-
to refer to the note below the dominant, Rameau denotes by that prefix
that scale-step 4 lay a fifth below the tonic, complementing the dominant
a fifth above the tonic. Just like the dominant, the subdominant supports
a dissonant first chord of a cadence.

With the subdominant now a formal member of the key, Rameau sought
a way to generate it from the fundamental or tonic in a manner comparable
to the generation of the dominant, which appears as the second pitch over
the fundamental in the corps sonore. Unfortunately for Rameau, the per-
fect fourth does not appear above the fundamental any more than the
minor third does. In Generation, Rameau proposes an origin for the
subdominant akin to his derivation of the minor third, locating the interval
below the fundamental rather than above it. In relation to C, he finds F a
twelfth (or compound fifth) below, complementing G a twelfth above.
Reduced to simple fifths, the three principal notes of the key supporting
the three principal types of chords appear as a series of fifths, F-C-G.
Rameau calls this the triple proportion because each tone is the third
harmonic of the previous one and thus each term is triple the previous
one. If F equals 1, then F, C, and G are 1:3:9 (Chapter 4; and Rameau
1726, Chapter 4).

Downward generation of the subdominant is just as problematic as
downward generation of the minor third. Since F does not exist in the
resonance of C, all Rameau has done is explain that C exists in the
resonance of F. That would imply that F was the source of the key of C,

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 143 ===

which of course Rameau does not intend. Shirlaw 1917 and Ferris 1959
cover this speculative issue in more detail, including Rameau’s later at-
tempts to find a source for the subdominant. As with his search for the
generation of the minor third, these speculative issues do not affect his
practical application of the subdominant.

Each of the three scale degrees participating in cadences now had a
name and a characteristic chord. Occasionally in some works, and rou-
tinely in the Code, his last practical work, Rameau uses the terms tonic,
subdominant, and dominant to refer both to a scale-step and to the
characteristic chord type it supports. Tonic means both scale-step 1 and a
perfect chord—any perfect chord is simply a tonic. Dominant means scale-
step 5 and a seventh chord. If a seventh chord has a major third, it is a
dominant-tonic—a dominant of the tonic. Otherwise it is a simple domi-
nant, imitating the dominant-tonic in a perfect cadence. And an added-
sixth chord, often referred to as an added chord, is a subdominant. When
the notes of this subdominant are rearranged to form a seventh chord on
scale-step 2, Rameau calls it the chord of the second (degree), or more
simply, a second chord, Although the terms tonic, subdominant, and
dominant have remained in use, these special connotations linking chord
type to scale degree were not widely adopted by musicians other than
Rameau’s own proteges, and they faded from use by the latter part of the
century (Rousseau 1768, article dominante; Scheibe 1773, p. 187).

THE SUBDOMINANT AND DOUBLE EMPLOYMENT
OF THE DISSONANCE
With the subdominant more firmly established, Rameau returns with re-
newed vigor to his assertion that the fundamental bass should progress
from one harmony to the next only by the fundamental consonances—
fifths and thirds. He proposes this in the Traité but also admits that because
of compositional license the fundamental bass can progress by step. In the
Dissertation, he mentions a process called double employment of the
dissonance (double emploi; Rameau 1732, p. 33; Hayes 1974a, pp. 47—
48), referring the reader to chapters in the Nouveau systéme that explain
the difference between a simple dominant chord and an added-sixth
chord—that is, whether the combination C-E-G-A is a simple dominant
(an A-minor seventh chord) or a subdominant (a C-chord with an added
sixth). But a full explanation does not appear until the Generation.
Double emploi refers to a change of harmonic function within a single
harmony that arises because the minor seventh chord on the second degree
(A-C-E-G in G major) has the same notes as the added-sixth chord on the
subdominant (as C-E-G-A). An instance of this chord can be a simple
dominant (a seventh chord) with the seventh resolving down as the fun-
damental bass descends a fifth, or it can be a subdominant (an added-

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies


=== PAGE 144 ===

134

Added

) Sue b) Seventh

eof]

9
i
9

-
|
|
)
i

| |
*
——_——— =
2 —e Pa “we
Example 5-3. Kameau 1737, Chapter 11; Hayes 1974), p. 80

sixth chord) with the added sixth resolving up as the fundamental bass
ascends a fifth (see Example 5-2).

With two possible fundamental basses (roots) for this chord, the fun-
damental bass can progress by a fifth no matter how it resolves. In Example
5-2a the goal is a tonic, so the fundamental bass ascends a fifth in an
imperfect cadence. In Example 5-2b the goal is a dominant-tonic, so the
fundamental bass descends a fifth, imitating a perfect cadence.

In Example 5-2b, there is a fundamental-bass progression by step be-
tween the first two chords. It is this situation that Rameau addresses with
double emploi (see Example 5-3). A single chord changes its functional
meaning so that the chord and its dissonance function in two different
manners, or are “doubly employed”:

[At the asterisked chord] our ear takes the new fundamental sound as rep-
resenting the subdominant [as an added-sixth chord] . . . There originates in
the ear the impression of a new possible succession for the harmony . . . Let
me explain. The order of the harmony above the new fundamental sound,
being like that of the dominant [arranged as a seventh chord], especially
between the two sounds from which the impression of dissonance originates,
causes this new fundamental sound to be adopted as a dominant, and from
then on causes its descent by a fifth—as required in passing from the domi-
nant to the principal sound [the tonic]|—to be desired, so that it satisfies the
ear by complying with this succession. (Rameau 1737, Chapter 9; Hayes,

p. 71)*

4. Example 5-3 appears in Chapter 11 of Rameau 1737; the explanation of double
emploi appears in Chapter 9, referring to the progression illustrated in Example 5-3, but
without musical notation.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 145 ===

With double emploi, Rameau can explain that fundamental-bass motions
appearing to rise a second really fall a fifth. Hence he succeeds in showing
how virtually all fundamental-bass successions occur by the consonances
contained within the perfect chord as it appears in the corps sonore.
Double emploi, although fully explained for the first time in the Gen-
eration, is another of the tenets implicitly present in the Traité, where
several examples apply two fundamental basses to a single chord in order
to avoid a succession by a second (Book 3, Chapter 41, quoted as Ex. 4-
19, m. 2; and examples of the régle de l’octave in Book 4, Chapter 6).

DOUBLE EMPLOI AND CHORDAL CONTEXT

If thought of in terms of the single chord under which the fundamental
bass changes, double emploi seems arbitrary. How could we possibly know
that the fundamental bass was changing during a sustained sonority? But
fundamental-bass progressions for Rameau concern movement between
chords, not individual harmonies. The extensive discussions in all his
works about fundamental-bass progressions are predicated on his belief
that chords occur in a context. Double emploi, like cadences and chords
by subposition, forces one to decide about the context of a chord before
being able to assign a fundamental bass. In Example 5-3, the motion
leading to the asterisked chord imitates a perfect cadence (G-C, with the
C-chord having an added sixth to prevent it from being conclusive). The
motion between this chord and the next one also imitates a perfect cadence
(A-D, with the first chord being a simple dominant instead of a dominant-
tonic, and with the second chord being a dominant-tonic instead of a
perfect chord), but only after reinterpreting the fundamental bass of the
asterisked chord. The chord changes its meaning and hence its implied
goal because of double emploi.

As a result, later harmonic theorists who agree with Rameau that chor-
dal identity depends on context (many of Rameau’s French protégés, Padre
Martini, and J. S. Bach pupils Nichelmann and Kirnberger) incorporate
double emploi or similar concepts in their writings, whether or not they
use the term itself. Other theorists who disagree with Rameau and treat
chordal identity mostly in terms of vertical structure (Marpurg, Koch,
Tiirk, and W. A. Mozart) do not include double emploi or related ideas.

CHORD PROGRESSIONS, KEYS, AND IMPLIED DISSONANCES

In Rameau’s harmonic theory, chords may be tonics (perfect chords),
dominants (seventh chords), or subdominants (added-sixth chords). The
quality of a specific chord is determined by the nature of the progression
in which it participates—a real or imitated cadence. Thus when the fun-
damental bass moves up or down by fifths, the first chord in each pair is
either a dominant (some sort of seventh chord) or a subdominant (an

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

135


=== PAGE 146 ===

136

added-sixth chord), and the second chord in each pair is a tonic (a perfect
chord). That tonic, unless it is the final chord of a phrase, becomes the
first member of the next pair of chords. To assume that role, the tonic
takes on the dissonance (seventh or added sixth) characteristic of the first
member of the next progression.

For instance, in a chain of simple dominants (minor seventh chords
proceeding by descending fifths), such as the progression E-minor’ to A-
minor’ to D-minor’, each pair of chords imitates but does not present a
perfect cadence. The first chord in each pair has a minor third (not a
leading tone to make it a dominant-tonic), and the second chord in each
pair is a seventh chord (not a perfect chord). From Rameau’s perspective,
these chords relate primarily to one another and only indirectly to a tonic.
Only when one of the simple dominants moves to a dominant-tonic (a
dominant-seventh chord) can a key be specified by a leading tone (whether
or not that dominant-tonic actually resolves to a tonic chord). If the chords
following this chain of dominants are a G’ chord and a C perfect chord,
there is a real cadence on C.

The result is a sense of key in which there often is a “floating tonic”
(not a term Rameau uses; Dahlhaus 1986b adds further thoughts). A tonic
when played may add a sixth and become a subdominant, then rising a
fifth. Or a tonic may add a seventh and become a simple dominant, then
falling a fifth. When the fundamental bass moves by thirds, the resulting
progression is a succession of tonics (perfect chords), since the first chord
in the pair can be neither a dominant nor a subdominant because its
dissonance would not resolve.

Rameau thus posits a ternary relationship between chord quality, type
of progression, and sense of key. The quality of a chord suggests where
that chord may move, while its actual movement in turn determines what
its quality should be. The chord qualities and the progression determine
the temporary tonic.

At bottom, this perspective is based on a simplistic dichotomy between
consonant tonics that are goals and dissonant chords that are mobile.
Rameau the practical theorist and composer knew that actual music can
go on for long periods of time without any dissonances being present and
still sound like it is not continually coming to a halt. Certainly his own
written compositions are not packed with continuous dissonances. In order
to explain how consonant chords do not imply continuous halts, Rameau
the speculative theorist explains that even when a chord in the score looks
consonant and carries no figuring, it may still imply a dissonance. If the
dissonance is missing from the score, he asks, “Do the eyes suffice in
music? There must be ears, and above all impartial judgement, if reason
is not to be blinded” (Rameau 1754, pp. 86-87).

Thus when Rameau in the Nouveau systéme adds a fundamental bass

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 147 ===

ae Se ae St ==
Qui me fait hé- si- | ter? Qu'cest-ce qu’en sa fa- veur la pi- ié me veut te? Fra- pons,
Basso continuo:
<=

[tonic becoming
Fundamental bass subdominant]
(added by Rameau): 6

Sle { = — -
—S
[change of key by Sth, [Passage from one tonic

the “most perfect progression”) to another]

17

A-che- | vons... je  fre- | mis! Vengeons-| nous...
6 (9] {7]

Feet

Ciel! qui peut mar- ré-

je

= ===:

=

7

Sepa Spe,

i_asinm.2 4

[movement from a tonic to a dominant by third, setting off a chain of
dominants with no change of key, including a ninth chord]

Example 5-4. Rameau 1726, pp. 82~84. Basso continuo figures in brackets absent
in Lully’s 1686 edition (facsimile in Verba 1973, p. 74). Remarks below
the fundamental bass paraphrase Rameau.

to a monologue from Lully’s Armide, he adds implied dissonances wher-
ever necessary to explain the progression (see Example 5-4). The excerpt
begins and ends in G major (within the E-minor monologue). There are
no accidentals in the melody, bass, or figuring. But because of his harmonic
norms, Rameau analyzes temporary changes of key to C major (m. 14),
A minor (m. 15), E minor (m. 16), A minor (m. 17), D major (m. 18),
and G major (m. 19). The progression ends with a chain of dominants
within the key of G major to confirm the cadence in measure 22. Rameau
adds implied dissonances in measure 15 (added sixth turning the tonic of
A into the subdominant of E), measure 17 (avoiding stepwise motion in
the fundamental bass into m. 18), and measures 18 and 20 (changing
tonics into simple dominants or dominant-tonics).

In a later analysis of the same passage in his Observations (1754),
Rameau extends the notion of implication even further via chromaticism
to strengthen the changes of key. He marks a 5b over the bass in measures
13 and 19 to confirm the move to C major, and a # over the bass A in
measure 20 to project a brief change to D major before the cadence in G
(Rameau 1754, pp. 91, 98). To be sure, Rameau’s assertion of local key

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

137


=== PAGE 148 ===

138

changes in this later analysis was partly motivated by his desire to answer
a critique of the monologue made by Jean Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778).
As part of the critique of French music in his Lettre sur la musique
francaise (1753), Rousseau, himself a composer of some note,’ singles out
this excerpt precisely because Rameau praised it in 1726 as an exemplar
of French music. Rousseau charges that Lully’s setting fails to portray
Armide’s hesitancy and then her resolve to act because the monologue
ends in the same key in which it begins and has too many perfect cadences.
Rameau seeks to demonstrate that changing harmonic functions do in fact
mirror Armide’s hesitancy. If the implied key changes in his 1754 analysis
are understandable to answer Rousseau, there is no such motivation for
the implied dissonances in the 1726 analysis.®

Rameau’s focus seems deplorably short-ranged, even though he under-
stands that the temporary tonics are not established as keys because they
are not preceded by cadences and that a ruling key (ton régnant) encom-
passes the quick tonal shifts. In his defense, it should be pointed out that
although some theorists, including Rameau himself in the Traité, occa-
sionally note that local chromaticism can occur without effecting a change
of key, most theorists until well into the nineteenth century call even a
single chromatic leading tone evidence of a key change. But Lully’s mon-
ologue contains no chromaticism.

The issue of dissonances not indicated by a composer arises again in
Rameau’s critique of the figured basses in Corelli’s opus 5 sonatas (Rameau
1726, Chapter 23). As shown in the annotated translation of this critique
in Appendix 1, Rameau felt quite strongly that the omission of crucial
dissonances in Corelli’s figures makes the sense of key or of harmonic
direction insecure. Although he was trying to explain how the harmonies
function both locally (in terms of dissonance treatment and chord-to-chord
progression) and in the large (creating a key, changing a key), some of
Rameau’s emendations replace Corelli’s simple triads with preposterous
strings of complex dissonances and subposed chords.

Was Rameau speaking as a speculative theorist in adding these disso-
nances and chromatics, simply trying to explain the directionality of har-
mony? In other words, was he arguing that when we hear a triad that
sounds mobile, its mobility is the result of dissonances that we add men-
tally because we know that the chord is not restful? Or did he mean that
these dissonances should be played? Various evidence points to the latter.

5. Rousseau’s opéra comique Le Devin du village (1752) remained in active repertoire
for some sixty years. The personal enmity between Rameau and Rousseau may have arisen
from Rameau’s criticism of a performance of Rousseau’s ballet opera Les muses galantes

in 1745 (Girdlestone 1969, pp. 478-479).
6. Verba 1973 comprehensively discusses Rameau’s and Rousseau’s dispute over this

monologue.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 149 ===

At the end of the Dissertation, Rameau realized a thoroughbass from
Corelli’s opus 5 in a tablature proposed to replace thoroughbass notation
(Hayes 1974c).” This tablature, clearly meant to be performed, includes
many implied dissonances.

Earlier, Rameau’s adversary in the dispute of 1729-1731 complained
that Rameau’s accompaniments are “almost always full of dissonances,
and consequently hard on the ear; quite often this is contrary to the
composer’s intentions.” Part of the dispute focuses on a measure contain-
ing a sustained bass D in a one-flat signature with the figuring 3-§-3 (no
musical illustration is provided). Rameau’s adversary explains that this
progression is merely “to vary the tonic chord.” But Rameau repeatedly
insists that playing the figures as written “amounts to entering the key of
G by a cadential progression without having placed a major third on the
first note, which is its dominant, and to going from the minor third to the
octave [i.e., from F-to-G over D-to-G]; it offends the ear and good sense.
Zarlino prohibited it. It amounts to making a cadence without having a
major third on the dominant . . . The foundation of harmony teaches us
that the perfect chord of G announces the G-mode, which is not at all in
question here.” Rameau ridicules his adversary’s claims to have merely
followed the composer’s intention: “If it is on the figuring that he bases
the composer’s intention, as is abundantly clear, that’s another matter.
Following this reasoning, if the figures are wrong, be it by the negligence
of the composer, the copyist, or the publisher, of course it’s necessary to
play a wrong chord” (Rameau 1729-1731, pp. 1286-1288, 2376).

It seems clear that Rameau failed to see that factors other than local
consonance and dissonance could affect the potential finality of a harmony
within a progression. His reasoning is similar to that of Arnold Schoen-
berg, who for many years avoided octave doublings in his atonal com-
positions because “to double is to emphasize, and an emphasized tone
could be interpreted as a root, or even as a tonic; the consequences of
such an interpretation must be avoided” (Schoenberg 1950, p. 219). Surely
it takes more than an octave doubling (as Schoenberg feared) or a con-
sonant chord (as Rameau feared) to establish a key.

A separate issue involving harmonic scale-step norms and implied key
changes concerns the possible chords that can represent the dominant at
a cadence. When a cadence on the dominant ends on a perfect chord, not
a seventh chord, does that mean that scale-step 5 is really a tonic, even if
temporarily? Rameau continually wavered on this issue, sometimes ex-

7. This is only one of several notational reforms proposed by Rameau. In the Traité, he
suggests a new way of notating key signatures, meter, and tempo (Book 2, Chapters 24—
25). In keeping with the spirit of the Enlightenment, there were countless suggestions for
notational reform from all quarters.

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

139


=== PAGE 150 ===

140

Example 5-5. Rameau [1761], Lesson K

plaining that the dominant could have a perfect chord and yet still be a
dominant (Rameau 1722, Book 3, Chapter 9), and elsewhere suggesting
that when it supports a perfect chord, scale-step 5 is temporarily a tonic,
and the original tonic its subdominant (Rameau 1737, Chapter 18). This
ambiguity remains in his last published thoughts on the topic: “Each
phrase-ending concludes in the fundamental bass exclusively on the tonic,
or on its dominant, [which is] therefore an implied tonic [censée tonique]”
(Rameau [1761], p. 84; discussed in Caplin 1981, pp. 42-45).

SUBPOSITION AND SUSPENSION

Throughout his works, Rameau continues to insist that subposition is the
proper theoretical explanation for suspended notes. But in the Code he
backs away from several former positions, no longer insisting, for instance,
that a suspended fourth need be called an eleventh.

Rameau also extends the notion of suspension to include the cadential
6/4, which as a triad does not arise from subposition. Whereas in the
Traité, he explains a cadential 6/4 as a tonic chord (illustrated in Example
4-15), now it is a “suspension that consists of retaining the entire perfect
chord of a fundamental note when one rises a fifth.” These suspensions
“are quite frequent immediately before a perfect cadence; they willingly
announce that cadence since they simply suspend [i.e., delay] the harmony
of the dominant that in fact announces the cadence; and often the fourth
then suspends [delays] the third of the tonic which concludes that same
cadence” (Rameau [1761], p. 54) (see Example 5-5).

Rameau explains the cadential 6/4 similarly in an earlier manuscript
treatise (Rameau c. 1740; Christensen 1987a, p. 30). Around the same
time, Charles Levens (1689-1764), a Bordeaux musician who appropri-
ated some of Rameau’s ideas although he probably never studied with
Rameau, explains the cadential 6/4 in a similar fashion when he notes that
on the arrival of a cadential dominant, suspensions and trills “cause the
chord of the principal note [the tonic chord] to be heard by means of the
suspension” (Levens 1743, p. 18).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 151 ===

Rameau on Accompaniment

Before establishing himself in Paris as a theorist and opera composer,
Rameau had spent the better part of two decades working primarily as an
organist and teacher. He continued actively teaching for decades thereafter.
It is therefore no surprise that he published his thoughts on accompaniment
several times. Book 4 of the Traité applies his newfound harmonic per-
spective to thoroughbass. A decade later, the Dissertation on Different
Methods of Accompaniment and Plan of a New Method contains a critique
of traditional thoroughbass and a new tablature for indicating harmonies.
Finally, an extended chapter in the Code lays out a pedagogy of accom-
paniment based on his harmonic theories (Chapter 5, pp. 24-78).

This last method is as close as Rameau ever got in print to a truly
practical work. Despite its frequently turgid prose, it provides a good
summary of his mature harmonic theories. Each of the thirty-two separate
lessons presents a single topic. Most lessons are illustrated by exercises.
Both the ordering and content of Rameau’s lessons highlight the differences
between his approach and thoroughbass methods.

After the first lesson, which briefly defines accompaniment, Rameau lists
the notes in a perfect chord and a seventh chord (Lesson 2), inversions
(3), how to finger these chords in the right hand (4), the scale (5), the
difference between basso continuo and the fundamental bass, and the
three types of chords (tonics, subdominants, dominants; Lesson 6). Then
he teaches how to play all sorts of progressions from the simplest to the
most complex. Each progression is to be learned in the right hand alone:
chains of dominants (7), the dominant-tonic chord (8), finding these chords
in different keys (9), relative major and minor keys (10), cadences (11),
keys and key signatures (12), relations between the ton régnant and other
keys (13), changing keys via cadences (14), which chords can follow a
tonic (15), double emploi (16), moving between keys via a chain of dom-
inants (17), a chain of irregular cadences (18), suspensions common at
cadences (19), chords common to several keys (pivot chords; Lesson 20),
subposition and suspension (21), mixing subpositions with perfect chords
(22), deceptive and otherwise evaded cadences (23), sixth chords connected
by step (24), the diminished seventh chord (25), chromaticism (26), and
enharmonic changes involving diminished seventh chords (27).

Rameau repeatedly insists that before moving on to the next lesson, the
student practice each exercise until it can be played automatically, without
even thinking. Only in this way will the student learn finger technique and
how to hear these progressions even before they are played. For as he
explains at the very beginning, “The principles of composition and accom-
paniment are the same, but in exactly the opposite order.” If students have

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

141


=== PAGE 152 ===

142

diligently learned all the progressions through Lesson 27, they are now
ready to add the basso continuo to these right-hand progressions (Lesson
28). The remaining lessons cover syncopation (29), the preparation and
resolution of dissonances in general (30; earlier he had taught this by rote),
some matters of fingering (31), and how to figure a bass part (32).

Rameau presents much of the material found in comprehensive tho-
roughbass methods as well as matters such as changing key by using
harmonic pivots and enharmonic changes of diminished seventh chords.
But his orientation is the opposite of thoroughbass methods. Where tho-
roughbass manuals teach how to play according to what is in the bass
part, Rameau teaches how to play all sorts of chord progressions and only
then explains how to recognize which progression belongs over a given
basso continuo. To defend his approach, he argues that a given funda-
mental-bass progression yields the same right-hand chords no matter what
inversions appear in the bass. Decades earlier, he had even argued that
since “harmony alone is of concern in accompaniment, and if I furnish a
way to render it always complete and regular without the help of the bass,
then the bass part [on the keyboard] will no longer be anything but an
extra part . .. Except for the case where there are no other instruments,
I do not see that there is any constraint against dispensing with the bass
in accompaniment on the harpsichord” (Rameau 1732, pp. 17-18; Hayes
197448, pp. 24-25). Where thoroughbass methods taught voice leading
based on the type of verticality over the continuo, Rameau taught voice
leading based on the type of progression in the fundamental bass.

Both methods teach the player voice-leading patterns that can then be
used as the basis of composition. But the application of these patterns to
composition would be quite different. In the thoroughbass composition
method detailed by Niedt, the composer learns to build the texture from
the bass and then vary it. If Rameau’s accompaniment method were used
to compose, the progressions would appear, but the actual bass line would
have to be chosen from the possible bass notes in each chord.

It might seem that Niedt’s thoroughbass approach was ideal for early
eighteenth-century styles, heavily dependent on the bass voice for support,
and that Rameau’s approach was more amenable to the newer styles
appearing after the middle of the century, where the emphasis was on
inventing articulated melodies and then harmonizing them. But Rameau’s
approach was in fact adopted by adherents of the older as well as the
newer styles. J. S. Bach pupil Christoph Nichelmann (1717-1762) used a
Rameauian approach in his 1755 treatise to compose and analyze numer-
ous examples in the older style (discussed in Chapter 8). And in the 1780s
W. A. Mozart used both thoroughbass and Rameauian fundamental bass
in his teaching (discussed in Chapter 7). He used thoroughbass exercises
to add the inner voices to existing outer-voice structures in a string-quartet

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 153 ===

format. This teaches voice leading, not the creation of a texture over a
basso continuo. By contrast, he teaches melodic harmonization in a Ra-
meauian manner. His student works out a fundamental bass to a melody,
then composes an actual bass line from the notes in the fundamental-bass
chords.

This change in compositional focus and pedagogy did not occur as a
rapid switch to an alternate perspective. Rather it was a gradual process
that evolved during much of the century—an evolution discussed in the
remaining chapters in this study.

Rameau as Publicist and Philosophe

From the time of his first publications, Rameau himself as well as reviewers
both friendly and hostile bemoaned the density of his prose and the poor
organization of his ideas. In the preface to the Traité (1722), Rameau
included not only a common disclaimer about “the feebleness of my
intellect,” but also a more heartfelt apology for “my long discourses and
repetitions.” Castel concurred, complaining about the Traité’s “overly
profound and learned style” (Castel 1728), as did Diderot, who in a 1748
essay on the science of sound expressed the wish “that someone would
bring [Rameau’s system] out from the obscurities enveloping it and put it
within everyone’s reach” (Rameau CTW 3, p. xl).

Aware that his writing was a potential obstacle to the spread of his
ideas, Rameau repeatedly solicited supporters to review his works so that
they could summarize his ideas in more accessible prose. Even when he
was virtually unknown in Paris in 1722, Rameau had his recent acquain-
tance Castel publish a sixty-six-page review of the Traité in the Jesuit
Journal de Trévoux only shortly after the Traité itself appeared. This was
no scholarly critique by an outsider, but the work of a knowledgeable
enthusiast who had discussed the work with its author (Girdlestone 1969,
pp. 486-489; Rameau CTW, 1, pp. IH; 2, p. xxii). The review clearly
lays out the main ideas of the Traité—as Rameau later wrote to him, “I
can only say the things, but you are able to give them life and color”
(Rameau 1736, p. 1698; Rameau CTW 3, pp. xxxix—xl). Castel, promi-
nent in intellectual circles and interested in music theory, invented the
clavecin oculaire, a keyboard instrument capable of producing both notes
and colors, and wrote a treatise proposing color-music (an idea enunciated
by Newton). Castel later reviewed the Nouveau systéme (Castel 1728), a
work whose inception he claimed to have inspired (Rameau CTW 3,
p. xxv), and the Generation (Castel 1737), the latter unfavorably after a
rift with Rameau. Extracts of Castel’s Traité review appeared in the Leip-
zig-based Neuer Zeitungen von Gelehrten Sachen in 1723, giving his ideas
a forum in Germany.

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

143


=== PAGE 154 ===

144

A similarly sponsored review of the Generation (1737) was written by
Thérése Deshayes, Rameau’s pupil and the bride of Rameau’s patron, La
Poupliniére (Deshayes 1737; Rameau CTW 3, pp. xxi—xxii). To be sure,
there were also reviews of Rameau’s works that were produced without
his participation; no less than five French journals printed discussions or
extracts of the Generation, and his later works received similar notice.

At the end of the 1720s, Rameau engaged in a public controversy with
an anonymous musician, sometimes assumed to be Michel Pignolet de
Montéclair, well-known author of a comprehensive and elegantly engraved
tutor published in 1709 (which contains, among other topics, an extensive
discussion of rhythm and meter including an illustrated discussion of
conducting patterns). In eight articles, Rameau and his adversary discussed
various aspects of fundamental bass, acoustics, and the practice of accom-
paniment (Rameau 1729-1731). The appearance of these articles in Mer-
cure de France, a leading journal, shows the stature Rameau’s theories
had gained in France even before he was known as an opera composer.
Also of interest is the origin of the controversy: “two quite renowned
musicians met on Sunday, May 8 in a house where the daughter is skilled
on the clavecin in order to confer about various issues of harmony.”
Rameau was already cultivating the intellectual world of Paris. Within not
too many years, he was close to the leading figures of the age, among
them Voltaire (1694-1778), Rousseau, Diderot, and Jean le Rond
D’Alembert (1717-1783).

Rameau took Diderot up on his 1748 wish for a more organized pres-
entation of Rameau’s ideas and enlisted the philosophe’s help in preparing
the Démonstration (1750), a work generally agreed to be his best orga-
nized (Rameau CTW 3, p. xxxix—xli).

Further publicity for Rameau’s theories, this time a rather mixed bless-
ing, came in D’Alembert’s Elemens de musique . . . suivant les principes
de M. Rameau (1752). D’Alembert, one of the leading mathematicians of
the day and a prime mover behind the Encyclopédie, presented what he
viewed as Rameau’s essential ideas in refreshingly lucid prose. The Elemens
became quite a popular work, remaining in print through 1779, appearing
in partial English translation as the article on music in the second and
third Encyclopaedia Britannica (1784 and 1797, the latter edition also
published in New York), and becoming the primary reference work on
Rameau’s theories in German via a 1757 translation by the German
musician, critic, and theorist Friedrich Wilhelm Marpurg (1718-1795).

Unfortunately for Rameau’s ideas, although the Generation and Dém-
onstration are the basis of much of Elemens, D’Alembert’s exposition
often agrees only superficially with Rameau’s theories. Rameau broke

8. Christensen 1989 skillfully covers the intellectual background of D’Alembert’s
Elemens.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 155 ===

publicly with D’Alembert not long after and the two quickly became bitter
enemies. The dispute first centered on D’Alembert’s defense of the Ency-
clopédie (1751-1765) from Rameau’s attacks on the music articles. In the
1740s, Rameau had been asked to write the articles on music but had
declined, requesting instead to review them before publication. Rousseau
wrote many of the articles, generally following Rameau’s theories but
differing with him on many points. Rameau published increasingly bitter
denunciations of the articles on music as the volumes appeared. D’Alem-
bert’s initial defense may well have been motivated by his desire to deflect
criticism of the politically sensitive project as a whole. But it soon became
an argument between opposing views on many issues, heightened by Ra-
meau’s renewed close relationship with the Jesuits as his friendship with
the Encyclopedists waned (Rameau CTW 3, pp. xlvi-xlviii, Ixi, and 4,
pp. xiii—xviii, xli). In 1762, D’Alembert revised the Elemens and departed
further from Rameau’s formulations.

D’Alembert was a dedicated amateur musician, but an amateur none-
theless. He became acquainted with Rameau’s ideas when Rameau sub-
mitted a draft of his Démonstration to the Royal Academy of Sciences in
1749. He apparently did not even know how to read music before en-
countering this work, but nonetheless wrote a knowledgeable and glowing
report. As Thomas Christensen argues, D’Alembert was primarily inter-
ested in publicizing Rameau’s ideas as a purely deductive system, casting
his title in homage to both Voltaire’s Eléments de la philosophie de Neuton
(Amsterdam, 1738) and Euclid’s Elements of Geometry. He had little
interest in practical matters, declaring with almost medieval zeal that “a
physical scientist worthy of the name has no more need of experiment in
order to demonstrate the laws of movement and statics than a good
geometer [the eighteenth-century title for a mathematician] needs ruler
and compass to verify that he has correctly resolved a difficult problem”
(D’Alembert-Diderot 1751-1765, article Expérimental). This deductive
stance is clear from the preface to the Elemens, where D’Alembert explains
that he “is unconcerned here with physical principles of resonating bodies,
and even less concerned with the metaphysical principle of the sentiment
of harmony . . . the sole issue here is making known how one can deduce
from a single experimental principle the laws of harmony that artists have
only found, so to speak, gropingly” (pp. v—vi). He thereby greatly limits
application of the corps sonore and the effects of harmony, the most
important underpinnings of, respectively, Rameau’s speculative and prac-
tical theories.

Throughout, D’Alembert deals with musical matters as only an amateur
could. His treatment of chord sevenths is characteristic. For Rameau, the
resolution of chord sevenths is a crucial element in the system of harmony.
It is a prime reason for using chord inversions, and a major motivation
for using cadences as models for chord progressions and for introducing

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

145


=== PAGE 156 ===

146

subposed chords. D’Alembert, by contrast, finds nothing special about the
resolution of chord sevenths. He explains that in the progression G’ to C,
F must resolve to E simply because in the four-voice setting he shows it
has nowhere else to go (pp. 78-79). Nowhere does he mention the term
or concept “minor dissonance.”

While various examples are far-fetched (such as the progression from
C-E-G to E-G#-B-C# illustrating an ascent of a third in the fundamental
bass, p. 115), essentials such as the difference between fundamental bass
and basso continuo are relegated to a digression at the very end of Part 1
(p. 95). Without this distinction, the whole topic of chord inversions plays
only a minor role in the book.

In the absence of German translations of any of Rameau’s works, it was
Marpurg’s 1757 rendering of D’Alembert and Marpurg’s own works
claiming to be based on Rameau that many Germans in the later eighteenth
century assumed to be Rameau’s theories. As a result, in the various
German debates over Rameau’s theories later in the century both sides
often misunderstood Rameau’s positions, Marpurg claiming to represent
Rameau but often differing from him in the most fundamental ways, and
his opponents upholding ideas similar to Rameau’s but attacking Rameau’s
name because they believed that Marpurg’s position was Rameau’s (Mar-
purg vs. Sorge, Marpurg vs. Kirnberger, C. P. E. Bach’s proclamation, and
so forth; discussed in Chapters 8 and 9). Many of the misconceptions
about Rameau’s theories that arose at that time have remained in modern
scholarship.

RAMEAU AND THE SCIENTIFIC COMMUNITY

As Rameau’s speculative theorizing became more involved with acoustics
and natural resonance in the 1730s, he came to believe that his achieve-
ments merited recognition not only among musicians but among scientists
and mathematicians as well. The spirit of the Enlightenment encouraged
musical amateurs to believe that with study they could discourse knowl-
edgeably on music theory. After all, D’Alembert wrote the Elemens and
some of the musical articles in the Encyclopédie, Diderot assisted Rameau
on the Démonstration and later either assisted Anton Bemetzrieder (c.
1743-c. 1817) or wrote the Lecons de clavecin published in 1771 under
Bemetzrieder’s name,? and various musical amateurs confidently sparred
with Rameau on musical issues. So Rameau quite confidently believed he

g. Bemetzrieder was a prolific writer on music, mathematics, and philosophy first in Paris
and then in London after 1781. The Legons was one of twenty-two separate works on
music, many of which appeared in several editions. The extent of Diderot’s contribution to
the Lecons remains uncertain, most recently surveyed in Gribenski 1980, which catalogs
Bemetzrieder’s works. In any event, the Legons are at best useful for an amateur, full of
preposterous voice leadings.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 157 ===

could discourse on science and philosophy. Rameau had already received
favorable reviews of his first two treatises from Castel, a figure better
known as a mathematician than a musician. And by the time he had
published the Generation in 1737, the fifty-four-year old Rameau was no
longer a relatively unknown current or former “Organist of the Cathedral
of Clermont in Auvergne” as he announced himself on the title pages of
the Traité and Nouveau systéme, but a renowned figure recognizable
simply as “M. Rameau” on the title page of all his remaining works. As
an opera composer, he was deemed successor to the legendary Jean-Bap-
tiste Lully (1632-1687), sparking the debates of the 1730s between the
lullistes and the ramistes, even though Rameau deplored the attacks on
Lully’s music, which he esteemed (surveyed in Girdlestone 1969, pp. 481—
483). In short, as a theorist, composer, organist, conductor, and teacher,
he had become a central figure in the musical-cultural-intellectual world
of mid-century Paris.

He now strove for recognition from the scientific community for himself
and for the music theory he believed he had placed on a more scientific
basis. One avenue to such recognition lay in the scientific academies. He
dedicated the Generation to the Académie royale des sciences (the first
dedication of any of his works, including his compositions). The Académie
responded with a favorable review by three eminent scholars, portions of
which Rameau appended to the work. A dozen years later, Rameau sub-
mitted a draft of the Démonstration (1750) to the Académie. But despite
a second favorable report, this time by D’Alembert, there was still no offer
of membership (Cohen 1981, pp. 82-85, details Rameau’s relationship
with the Académie royale). Later in the 1750s, Rameau turned his atten-
tion abroad, submitting an early draft of the Nouvelles réflexions (1760)
to the prestigious Accademia delle Scienze dell’ Istituto di Bologna (of
which D’Alembert was a member), resulting not in the offer Rameau had
hoped for, but in a review of all of Rameau’s works by Padre Martini
(1706-1784), himself a member of the Accademia since 1758 (Rameau
CTW 4, pp. xxxii-xxxix; Jacobi 1964). He also submitted both the Gen-
eration and the Démonstration to the Royal Society of London (Cohen
1981, p. 84). In addition, Rameau corresponded with a number of prom-
inent mathematicians, among them Leonhard Euler (1707—1783), himself
the author of a treatise on music (Euler 1739), with whom Rameau then
entered into a polemic when Euler questioned octave equivalence (Rameau
1752; Rameau CTW 5, pp. xxxii—xxxiv), and Jean Bernoulli (1710-1790)
(Rameau CTW 3, p. lviii; Girdlestone 1969, pp. 490-491).

For various reasons none of these applications got Rameau the scientific
recognition he believed he merited. A major one is that Rameau was too
experienced a musician to eliminate musical practices from his theory that
were irreconcilable with rigorous deductive or inductive methods. As

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

147


=== PAGE 158 ===

148

Pierre-Joseph Roussier (c. 1716-1792), one of Rameau’s followers and
systematizers, put it, the “Founder of Harmony . . . sometimes forgot this
principle [Roussier’s interpretation of fundamental bass] in his writings,
substituting concepts of practice and routine from which he was unable
to completely free himself, as they had been unfortunately inculcated into
him since early childhood” (Roussier 1765, pp. 37-38; Gessele 1989,
p. 170).1°

Rameau’s arguments with scientists reveals how much he was a musi-
cian, not a scientist. When Euler pointed out that octave duplications were
not identical with the unison, a reality that creates problems for the
generation and inversion of chords, Rameau responded with an acoustical
error (arguing, among other points, that the octave was inaudible in
harmonic resonance) and a music-functional, not a scientific or mathe-
matical rebuttal (that when men and women sing together in octaves, they
think they are singing in unison).

Additional reasons for rejections of Rameau’s applications for member-
ship apply to different circumstances. Concerning the Bologna Accademia,
for instance, Martini’s lack of support for Rameau’s application probably
had little to do with theoretical matters. According to a letter of 1750,
Martini apparently thought Rameau’s system applied only to profane and
theatrical music (Schnoebelen 1979, letter 476). Even in the 1770s, when
Martini was fully applying Rameau’s harmonic theory to sixteenth- and
seventeenth-century sacred music (including chordal inversions, added-
sixth chords, double emploi, and subposition to explain suspensions),
Martini chastised Rameau for only applying his ideas to “the modern style
of music for the theater and for pure pleasure . . . But the purpose of
music is much more noble, and its use far more important when it is
created, even by the confession of the same M. Rameau, to sing the praise
of God” (Martini [1774], p. vi).

Rameau in his later years made increasingly grandiose claims for the
role of music theory and his own discoveries of the corps sonore. He came
to believe that “nature seems to impart to us via music the physical
principle of those first purely mathematical notions from which devolve
all the sciences—I mean the harmonic, arithmetic, and geometric propor-
tions” (Rameau 1750, p. vi). He even contended that not only mathematics
and the sciences, but religion itself was revealed to man via the corps
sonore. This brought Rameau to a position commonly held by many
devout theorists before him: “The entire basis of harmony consists of
numbers and proportions, for GOd has set the measure and importance
of everything in numbers because he himself is a GOd of order. What

to. Osborne 1966 and Gessele 1989 contain the most complete surveys of Roussier’s

theories.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 159 ===

GOd and Nature order, man must willingly imitate . .. When we consider
the musical proportional numbers, they are nothing other than a proper
order set by GOd and Nature” (Werckmeister 1697, p. 2).

A part of Rameau’s scientific stance may have been the result not only
of the age but also of the French penchant for public debate over every
development in the arts and sciences. No significant innovation in eigh-
teenth-century France avoided being subjected to a war of words. Rameau
as composer was involved in the lulliste-ramiste battle of the 1730s and
the Querelle des Bouffons of the 1750s (Girdlestone 1969, pp. 482-484,
493-494, and 500-507). So it was only natural for him to seek recognition
as a theorist in the public arena.

As more than one historian has noted, the wars of words in midcentury
France, even those on nonpolitical issues, were in many ways proxy battles
over allegiances to entirely different world views—battles that led to the
Revolution after all the principals in the debates had departed from the
scene (Paul 1971). In the highly polarized political-religious-cultural-intel-
lectual world of eighteenth-century France, alliances with one or another
party often led to disastrous relations with the others. It is no coincidence
that the warm reviews that Castel, a Jesuit, gave to the Traité and the
Nouveau systéme in the 1720s gave way to a hostile reception of the
Generation as Rameau considered collaborating with Voltaire on stage
works in 1733 and actually did so in 1745, courted the Académie, and
was called an artiste philosophique by D’Alembert in the preface to the
Encyclopédie. Likewise, those who supported the lullistes against Rameau
in the 1730s, when Rameau was friendly with the philosophes, once again
became ardent ramistes in the 1750s, when the Querelle made Rameau’s
music a symbol of the French establishment and culture. In fact, even
Rousseau’s famous attack on the very existence of French music in 1753
may have had more of a political than a musical motivation. Only three
years earlier, Rousseau had supported French music over Italian music
(Strunk 1950, p. 654). And just the previous year, Rousseau’s own Devin
du village, in French of course, had opened for one of the longest runs in
the history of musical theater. In the 1750s, when the Querelle and Ra-
meau’s criticism of the music articles in the Encyclopédie made it clear
that he was no longer the darling of the philosophes, the Jesuit Journal de
Trévoux once again begin to publish enthusiastic reviews of his works.

One reading this polemic nowadays easily gets the feeling that Rameau
was in over his head and was used as a pawn by both sides. For instance,
Erwin Jacobi suggests not only that the rift between Rameau and Castel
may have originated over issues other than music-theoretical but that the
fires were stoked by writers other than the two principals, Voltaire among
them (Rameau CTW 3, pp. xxvii—xxviii, xlvi—xlviii). Rameau’s primary
interests were music and music theory, not the political and social contexts

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

149


=== PAGE 160 ===

150

of these disputes. When he tried as a musician to support Lully at the time
of the /ulliste-ramiste battles of the 1730s (in the preface to his Les Indes
galantes of 1735), he seems not to have understood the motivation of the
ramistes.

At the same time, his allegiances within French politics affected his
reputation outside France. The German composer, theorist, and critic
Johann Mattheson (1681-1764) waged a campaign against Rameau’s
ideas, never once dealing substantively with any of the major theoretical
issues, but repeatedly invoking religious and nationalistic animosity. He
links Rameau, “one of the most famous music teachers in France, .. .
with his Jesuit devotees (who, unfortunately!, are now in power),” he
refers to “M. Rameau and those of his rabble,” and he disparages “the
Jesuits [who] now turn him into a miracle” (Rameau CTW 3, pp. xxxi—
xxxiv). Later in the century, nationalistic sentiments against the inordinate
French influence in the court of Frederick the Great influenced many to
reject Rameau’s name while they supported ideas that came directly from
his works. Similar nationalistic arguments even appear in the twentieth
century (Schenker 1930; in more muted forms elsewhere).

The Transmission of Rameau’s Ideas

Considering the difficulty of Rameau’s writing style, the novelty of his
overall perspective, the continual evolution of his ideas on some topics,
the lack of any single definitive treatise that presents his theory in a unified
fashion, and some problematic concepts, what is perhaps most surprising
is that his ideas became as widespread as they did in a relatively short
time. Some basic tenets—reduction of harmonies to triads and seventh
chords, inversion of these chords, and root motions as a way of under-
standing musical continuity and tonal identity—must have answered a
need among musicians for a new mode of explaining harmony and voice-
leading, for these tenets spread rapidly and became a part of common
musical parlance, even among musicians who claimed ignorance of Ra-
meau’s writings.

Probably only a few musicians read his treatises from cover to cover.
Even Marpurg, who saw himself as Rameau’s publicist in Germany, seems
to have been unfamiliar with much of Rameau’s writings. Most of Ra-
meau’s ideas probably spread more via reviews of his works and by word
of mouth than by his works themselves. Sorge, for instance, who appar-
ently did not read French (Marpurg 1759-1763, 10, p. 79), claimed that
he found out that Rameau derived all dissonances from the seventh chord
via a critical remark in Mattheson 1735 (Sorge 1760, Chapter 12, pars.
3-4). In sum, a few musicians studied his writings, but most knew only a
few slogans or superficial features.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 161 ===

Thorough
Bass

Natural
Bass

Example 5-6. Lampe 1737, Plate 2, Ex. 3

As a result, there are not that many works before the 1750s (three
decades after the Traité) that cite Rameau directly. This is especially true
in Germany, where as widely read a commentator as Lorenz Mizler (1711—
1787) seems to have remained virtually unaware of Rameau as a theorist.
In 1747, he included Rameau “formerly [25 years formerly!] of Clermont”
among a list of organists copied from Mattheson 1739 (Mizler 1736—
1754, Vol. 3, p. 531). And in 1754, Mizler merely cited D’Alembert’s
1752 Elemens among “recent and noteworthy works” (ibid., Vol. 4,
pp. 181-182). The similarly widely read Jacob Adlung (1699-1762) seems
to have been aware in 1758 only of the existence of Rameau’s Traité, but
not its ideas. Yet Joseph Riepel (1709-1782), living in Regensburg, not a
main musical-intellectual center in Germany, cites the Démonstration
(1750) only two years after its publication (Riepel 1752, p. 75).

The absence of Rameau’s name (except in sloganeering such as Matthe-
son’s) does not indicate, however, that his ideas were not entering common
musical parlance. The German-born John Frederick Lampe (c. 1703—
1751), who arrived in London around 1725 as a bassoonist and remained
as a prolific opera composer, introduced many of Rameau’s basic ideas to
England in a 1737 thoroughbass manual “after the most rational manner,”
although Lampe does not credit Rameau by name and departs from Ra-
meau’s terminology. The work is amply illustrated, with ninety-three plates
for only forty-five pages of text. Lampe presents his material with a clarity
of organization, language, and graphic illustration that Rameau’s works
so signally lacked. For instance, to explain chordal inversions, Lampe
differentiates the Natural Bass of a chord from its Thorough Bass: “the
latter sounds any Part or Note of a Cord as a Bass, but the Former keeps
its place as Ground-Note of the Cord” (p. 18) (see Example 5-6). The
illustration of inversions of a seventh chord are even more striking (see
Example 5-7).

Lampe’s presentation of the key system is similar to what Rameau
offered in the Generation of the same year, but without Rameau’s termi-

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

151


=== PAGE 162 ===

152

Ra

a

Thorough je t
Bass = a |
Kfeynote] +; 2d 3} 3d [Similar examples for
od : : all inversions. ]
woe \
Natural js 4 =<
Bass = = J
K{eynote) Sth K{eynote}

Example 5-7. Lampe 1737, Plate 6, Ex. 16

nology, suggesting that Lampe may have received this conception from
another musician who had studied with Rameau: “Any Ground Note of
a Cord may be made a Key Note,” but only C major and A minor serve
as models for keys “because they have the nearest related Harmonies for
their principal Cords, viz. the Cord of the fourth and fifth note to the Key
Note, and the Third Note of either Cord having the same Relation to the
third Note in the Cord of the key” (pp. 22-24) (see Example 5-8). He
thus recognizes the tonic, subdominant, and dominant as the “principal
Cords,” but without using the term subdominant.

In this work, as well as his composition manual published three years
later, Lampe seems to disavow any knowledge of Rameau’s works when
he claims that his method is “something peculiar from the Way Masters
have generally taught Thorough Bass” (Lampe 1737, p. vi; Lampe 1740,
p. 17). But in the later work he quotes from Rameau’s Traité (p. 46).

Another work from the 1730s, a thoroughbass treatise by the Dutch
musician Quirinus van Blankenburg (1654-1739), borrows several ideas
from Rameau, including the sousdominante (Plate dd) and subposed
chords. “If in the indicated chord on C the fifth is changed to a sixth, the
root-tone [Hoofdtoon] becomes A; furthermore if one sets the fifth and
fourth together, the chord has two roots, namely F and C. Similarly, if a
seventh is added there are then two root-tones C and E” (p. 178) (see
Example 5-9).

The most comprehensive early work borrowing Rameau’s ideas is Lev-
ens’ 1743 treatise on harmony and composition. This work, praised in

Cord of the Cord of the
Key note Key note

Example 5-8. Lampe 1737, Plate 4, Ex. 9

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 163 ===

a

—! oo
ane

Cc a

Example 5-9. Blankenburg 1739, Plate cc.

Gerber 1790 for its “considerable insight and practical knowledge,” or-
ganizes the materials of harmony according to Rameau’s approach, but
departs from Rameau on some matters, uses its own terminology, and
includes some interpretations of chords that do not appear in Rameau’s
publications until after 1743 (Krehbiel 1964 discusses speculative aspects
of Levens’ ideas). This suggests that Levens, whose spent his life in Mar-
seilles, Aix-en-Provence, Vannes, and Bordeaux, but who seems never to
have been around Paris, probably learned about Rameau’s ideas both from
his earlier publications and from other musicians who had studied with
him.

Rameau’s influence is apparent in the categorization of chords and in
the use of basse fondamentale to explain chord progressions. Consonant
chords are either direct (the accord parfait) or indirect (6 and 6/4 chords),
which “represent the perfect chord in their progressions [modulation] . . .
{and] differ from the perfect chord in that they do not have the principal
note in the bass” (pp. 13-14). There are three types of dissonant chords:
small (petit), including all seventh chords (Rameau’s dominants); medium
(moyen), including the added-sixth chord (Rameau’s subdominant); and
large (grand), including ninth and eleventh chords (Rameau’s subposed
chords).

Chord progressions are discussed in terms of the basse fondamentale
(Chapters 10-12), the characteristic dissonances of a seventh on domi-
nants and an added sixth on subdominants (Chapter 6), major and minor
dissonances (Chapter 6), and cadences (Chapter 17). Levens does not use
double emploi but does differentiate the added-sixth chord on scale-step

11. The copy of the Abregé in the New York Public Library is bound together with an
eight-page manuscript of music paper entitled, on its second leaf, “principes de compositions
de Mr Rameau.” The topics covered are intervals and their inversion, chord types, funda-
mental bass, rules of fundamental-bass progression, inversions, cadences, licenses, and
various progressions in numerous keys (through D# major!). Although it summarizes Ra-
meau’s ideas, the manuscript uses Levens’ terminology (petits and moyens dissonances on
fol. 1°).

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

153


=== PAGE 164 ===

154

4 progressing to the tonic from the same notes progressing to the dominant
as a seventh chord (pp. 17-18).

An interesting practical application of fundamental bass rules appears
in Chapter 12 on “more extended rules of composition.” Levens treats
each scale step in turn, discussing each chord type that could occur and
how that chord would function in a fundamental-bass progression. Scale-
step 1, for instance, can support nine possible harmonies:

1. A perfect chord, moving as the fundamental bass permits.

2. A seventh chord, if the fundamental bass permits resolution of the
seventh.

3. An added-sixth chord, if the fundamental bass permits resolution of
the sixth.

4. A 6/4 chord, as a subdominant chord .

5. A 7/4/2 chord, as a dominant over the tonic bass between two tonic
chords.

6. A 6/4/2 chord, as a subdominant over the tonic bass between two
tonic chords.

7. A 9/4 chord, as a suspension between a dominant and its tonic
resolution.

8. A 5/4 chord, a suspension after a subdominant or dominant.

g. A 6/4/2 chord, a suspension after a tonic and before a dominant.
Note that Levens differentiates this chord from number 6. Number
6 functions as an added-sixth chord, while number 9 functions as a
seventh chord.

This is a discussion comparable to that in many later harmony texts. There
is nothing quite so well organized in any of Rameau’s published works.

Another work that indicates Rameau’s influence, although it contains
no material derived from Rameau’s works, was published in Paris a year
before Levens’ treatise. La musique pratique et theorique, réduite a ses
principes naturels (1742) by Charles Antoine Vion is a primer in musical
rudiments that does not progress to the study of harmony. Near the end,
Vion recommends that students interested in further study consult the
“excellent Traité de l’Harmonie, composed by M. Rameau, which will
not be difficult for them . . . [and] which will serve them as an inexhaustible
source of everything that pleases the ear and the eye” (p. 58). Vion
recommends only one other book, Brossard’s 1703 Dictionnaire, in which
students will find “advanced and curious instructions” (ibid.).

A further French work of the 1740s citing Rameau is the Harmonie
theorico-pratique (1746) by Charles Blainville (c. 1710-c. 1777). Part 1
of Blainville’s work is a brief but thorough summary of Rameau’s ideas,
citing triads, seventh chords, and their inversions as the sole chord types,
and explaining fundamental bass, the various types of cadences, and

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 165 ===

chords by subposition. The remaining parts of the work form a traditional
presentation of counterpoint, proceeding from simple intervals in two parts
through added figurations, fugues, key changes, and even enharmonic
changes of diminished sevenths and other chords. Despite his promise “to
reconcile the modern theory of M. Rameau with the old and common
practice” (p. ii), Blainville makes no further reference to Rameau in the
later parts of the manual. Less than a decade later, he published a criticism
of Rameau’s theories and compositions, claiming that traditional counter-
point produced better compositions than Rameau’s theory.

These works and others published in the 1740s and early 1750s (Sorge
1745-1747 and Hahn 1751, discussed in Chapter 6) show the extent to
which Rameau’s ideas had spread beyond his works and his direct influ-
ence, even before D’Alembert’s and Marpurg’s popularizations. As shown
in Chapters 6 through 9, many of Rameau’s ideas were so widely known
and accepted by the 1750s that musicians no longer associated them with
Rameau. They were simply common musical knowledge.

Summary

Rameau took the study of harmony, the least prominent of the three
theoretical traditions inherited from the seventeenth century, and placed
it at the center of music-theoretic discourse, where it has remained to the
present time. Rameau’s harmonic perspective provided solutions to prob-
lems of dissonance treatment that Fux despaired of explaining and that
thoroughbass theorists dealt with only by inventing rule after rule and
exception after exception.

Likewise, Rameau changed chord classification forever. For him there
are two types of chords: the triad and the seventh chord (which by
subposition generates the ninth and eleventh chords, and by reinterpreta-
tion generates the added-sixth chord). Every harmony is either an arrange-
ment of one of these or contains melodic ornamentation. Generations of
theorists continued to argue over how many chord types there are, whether
the added-sixth chord is a separate chord type, and even whether the
seventh chord is a harmonic entity. But Rameau’s types remained the point
of departure. No theorist since Rameau’s death has argued for a return to
the seventy or more different chord types listed in thoroughbass manuals.
And no theorist has argued that chordal inversions were not related to
one another.

Some theorists believed that Rameau had simply demonstrated that
harmonic units were to be constructed in thirds and proceeded to enu-
merate all sorts of ninth, eleventh, and thirteenth chords. By doing so,
they forgot that Rameau’s motivation for subposed ninth and eleventh
chords is to provide a speculative explanation for all dissonance resolutions

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

155


=== PAGE 166 ===

156

alongside the linear understanding of suspensions. Certainly the most
absurd application of a rule connected to Rameau’s subposed chords
occurred around 1900, when a Viennese society, refusing to premiere
Arnold Schoenberg’s Verklarte Nacht (1899), explained that they could
not present the work because it contains an inverted ninth chord—quite
an impossibility according to the censor’s perspective (Schoenberg 1946,
p. 131).

In addition to clarifying dissonance resolutions and altering chord clas-
sifications, Rameau’s harmonic perspective raises issues that had been
considered only peripherally, if at all, by earlier theory. Primary among
these is what is to be considered the expression of a single harmony. In
thoroughbass theory, as soon as the figures change, theorists generally
spoke of a new harmony. In some cases, Rameau maintains a thoroughbass
perspective, arguing that what modern theory considers a single harmony
is in fact more than one harmony (a suspension and its resolution when
treated as a subposed chord and a chord of resolution). Yet in other
instances, he explains how what others call two or more harmonies is
really only one (such as a cadential 6/4 resolving to a dominant seventh
as an expression only of the dominant). His recommendation that the
basso continuo generally be conjunct during a phrase before literally fol-
lowing the fundamental bass at the cadence, his treatment of separate
levels of key change, and his long search for a basis for harmonic pro-
gressions—these and other aspects of his thinking raise questions that have
been recast in the twentieth century in the terminology of scale-step (Stufe)
and prolongation.

With his new harmonic perspective, Rameau articulated new questions
concerning musical continuity. For Rameau, harmonic motion continues
until reaching a tonic—since dissonance creates the need for resolution,
Rameau equates nontonic status with dissonance, arguing that nontonics
must carry real or implied dissonances. This dichotomy (consonant tonic
versus dissonant nontonic) is certainly too simplistic to stand up to much
scrutiny—indeed, Rameau’s unconvincing insistence that all nontonic har-
monies have either actual or implied dissonances or chromaticism is all
that is needed to demolish his argument. But he was the first to raise the
issue at all.

The speculative side of Rameau’s theories also had its consequences.
Rameau removed music theory from mathematical manipulation and made
its focus the scientific study of sound, its propagation, and its reception
by humans. His own attempts to explain tonal harmonic practices via
scientific investigation did not lead to widely accepted answers—they were
largely ignored by practical musicians and were deemed an extravagant
and ultimately futile endeavor by scientists. But his attempts prompted
others, amateur musicians and professionals alike, to seek in the relation-

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 167 ===

ship between musical phenomena and acoustics the models for the musical
syntax they preferred. None of these theorists has come up with a satis-
factory origin of the minor triad, of the seventh chord, of harmonic
progression, or of a host of other issues. Nowadays, following the demise
of common-practice tonality as the sole recognized musical language, all
such naturalistic investigations seem suspect, having been replaced by
psychological modeling, information theory, and other approaches. But
Rameau’s interest in this topic was not at all out of line with other
speculative theorists of the past. And his invocation of the major triad as
a “chord of nature” is reflected in many an eighteenth-century and nine-
teenth-century piece, Beethoven’s Pastorale Symphony being one obvious
example.

In sum, Rameau’s ideas were the single greatest influence on harmony
theory for following generations. Just as much of late-sixteenth-century
and seventeenth-century theory can be understood only in terms of Zar-
lino, Rameau’s theories dominate both his own century and the following
ones. There is hardly an idea in later eighteenth-century, nineteenth-cen-
tury, or much twentieth-century harmonic theory that does not have its
origin in Rameau’s works. And not until Schenker does a theorist articulate
a significantly different musical perspective.

Rameau’s Later Works and Controversies

157


=== PAGE 168 ===

CHAPTER SIX

CE 6 SP

Mattheson and the Study
of Melody

It is not enough to avoid what is bad; one must also bring forth what is
good, expressive, and beautiful. Not everything in composition is ac-
complished by means of tidiness and correctness ... In sum, more
should always be judged by an expressive melody than by the artistic
harmony that is obedient to it.

Mattheson 1725, pp. 54-55

Johann Mattheson as Theorist

The preceding chapters survey the origins of eighteenth-century concepts
and three principal theoretical traditions of the first half of the century:
species counterpoint, thoroughbass, and the theory of harmony. These
may be three distinct approaches to musical structure, but they are by no
means the only ones of the time. Many composition treatises, both manu-
script (Walther 1708, Scheibe c. 1730) and published (Masson 1699), do
not hew to a single approach. Instead, they utilize elements of several
approaches: some counterpoint (interval successions, dissonance resolu-
tion), some harmony (triads and other chord types), some thoroughbass
(especially the content of rules for unfigured basses), imitation and fugue,
and other topics. What these manuals may lack in theoretical consistency
they often offset by presenting practical experience accumulated over
generations.

Consider one instance in the manuscript composition treatise that the
composer and music-lexicographer Johann Gottfried Walther (1684—
1748) wrote in 1708. As he introduces their notation, Walther cites five
important uses for rests: “1. To allow singers to breathe; and to allow
instrumentalists, especially wind players, to rest. 2. To differentiate the
text. 3. To form fugues [presumably because rests in some voices allow a


=== PAGE 169 ===

fugal exposition to occur]. 4. To avoid forbidden intervals. 5. To arouse
the attention of the listener” (p. 28). This list is a paradigm of systematic
inconsistency in that each item belongs to an entirely different domain of
musical knowledge. Yet each illuminates a great deal of practical infor-
mation. One can easily imagine a composition teacher using any one of
them to launch a detailed discussion of a crucial aspect of compositional
craft: instrumentation and timbral variety, the relation of textual structure
to what we call musical form, textural variety, the rules of counterpoint,
and the relation between music and rhetoric. Some of these topics hardly
appear in works more singlemindedly devoted to any one of the three
main traditions.

Of all the writers on music during the first half of the eighteenth century,
the one whose works best exemplify this type of presentation that eschews
the metholodogies of the three traditions of counterpoint, thoroughbass,
and harmony is Johann Mattheson (1681-1764), theorist and composer
in Hamburg. He was one of the most prolific writers on music in the
eighteenth century, publishing treatises, manuals, journals, and biographies
from the 1710s through the 1750s.

Despite his wide-ranging publications, Mattheson is not a significant
figure in species counterpoint, thoroughbass, or harmonic theory. He
thought well of Fux’s Gradus but does not include anything resembling
species counterpoint in his encyclopedic Der vollkommene Capellmeister
(1739)—instead he borrows Christoph Bernhard’s atomistic treatment of
simple counterpoint. Although he published two thoroughbass manuals
(Mattheson 1719/1731 and 1735), he regarded thoroughbass mostly as a
mechanical task for performers. His efforts do not add anything substantial
to thoroughbass theory, and his examples have been criticized for their
“extraordinarily slovenly and incorrect” voice leadings (Arnold 1931,
p. 281). Finally, though he knew Rameau’s Traité, he had little interest in
harmonic theory. His lifelong polemic against Rameau ignores almost all
the features of Rameau’s theories, instead railing repeatedly against Ra-
meau’s statement that harmony is the source of melody and criticizing
Rameau for his links to the Jesuits.

In fact, on the topics that lie at the heart of these three theoretical
traditions, Mattheson’s discussions are sometimes only barely respectable.
His remarks on voice leading and harmony contain a host of peculiar and
extravagant statements. He argues that changing the size of an interval
does not affect its status as a consonance and proceeds to include aug-
mented and diminished thirds, fifths, sixths, and octaves among the con-
sonances. With typical bombast and lack of explanation, he asserts that
the diminished fifth “does far more consonant service for harmony than
the perfect fifth” (Mattheson 1739, Part 3, Chapter 3, par. 4). And since
the perfect fifth can be treated as a suspension in a 6/5 chord, he argues

Mattheson and the Study of Melody

159


=== PAGE 170 ===

160

ca re

Pita =

Example 6-1. Mattheson 1739, Part 3, Chapter 7, par. 28

that it is therefore equivalent to the diminished fifth in quality (Part 3,
Chapter 6). He includes an example of the diminished sixth, noting that
“one treats it almost exactly the same as the ordinary minor one when a
fifth follows” (see Example 6-1).

Concerning dissonances, Mattheson opposes the position held by vir-
tually every other theorist of his and earlier ages. He rejects the notion
that in a dissonant configuration one or more parts create dissonance
against a consonant substructure, asserting instead that both parts are
dissonant (Part 3, Chapter 10). With such a perspective, he has great
difficulty specifying systematically which note should resolve and how that
resolution must take place. He has problems explaining other resolutions
as well, offering Example 6-2 to show how a seventh “resolves” to a
diminished fourth. He also notes that the C is an accented passing tone
(Note Cambiate), failing to realize that this implies either a resolution of
D to B or an unresolved D.

To be sure, there are other instances where Mattheson shows a solid
understanding of voice leading. In Example 6-3, for instance, he demon-
strates that a succession of a seventh to an augmented fourth can arise as
an elaboration of 7—6.

His writings concerning harmony and voice leading also suffer from
confusing combinations of different materials within a single discussion.
For instance, when he discusses how to use perfect and imperfect conso-
nances, he cites various authorities, among them Fux’s four rules (Matthe-
son 1739, Part 3, Chapter 3, par. 21). But he also allows occasional parallel
fifths and octaves and recommends parallel octaves when cello and bass

———————
ei
pf Z $7 ‘i

Example 6-2. Mattheson 1739, Part 3, Chapter 13, par. 8

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 171 ===

fee TF

Example 6-3. Mattheson 1739, Part 3, Chapter 13, par. 11

play together or when flutes double a melody (par. 35). In another passage,
he gives the good advice to use more imperfect than perfect consonances
and to avoid frequent unisons and octaves in writing for few voices. He
then argues that the second harmonization in Example 6-4 is better than
the first despite the opening octave.

Surely a reader to whom this material was new would be confused.
Fux’s four rules apply to independent parts, while doubling basses or
melodies concerns instrumentation. Occasional parallels between voices
may be excusable when relatively covered, but that advice hardly belongs
in a discussion of elementary counterpoint. And an adequate explanation
of the superiority of the second alternative in Example 6-4 would deal
with its expression of the basic harmonies of the key, not how it uses
perfect or imperfect consonances.

The Study of Melody

If Mattheson is somewhat less than authoritative on harmony and voice
leading, he is nevertheless an important theorist because his works include
the first serious acknowledgement of the central role of melody in the
newer musical styles emerging in the 1720s and 1730s. Melody was a
central concern to him throughout his life. Even before he was irritated

a) (2) 3)

= ood

Example 6-4. Mattheson 1739, Part 3, Chapter 3, par. 43

Mattheson and the Study of Melody

161


=== PAGE 172 ===

162

by Rameau’s assertion that the source of melody resides in harmony, he
complained:

As a rule, we pay far too little attention to the science of melody, and mix
almost everything together under the science of harmony. Similarly, we con-
sider it unimportant that those who wish to compose must be thoroughly
acquainted with the melodic science as the first part of composition: thus,
we always regard the melodic science as something unimportant or totally
worthless, and thus do not know, understand, or consider that this noblest
and most pre-eminent part [of music] is not only the true basis of all the
others, but is also certainly and truthfully the only solid essence by which
the emotions can be moved . . . It truly requires more knowledge to construct
a single monody that will force its way into one’s heart than to concoct a
thousand canons. But thus far no books or precepts have taught this knowl-
edge. (Mattheson 1722, pp. 261-262)

The word monody in the penultimate sentence refers not to the seconda
pratica but to a formulation of the German theorist Wolfgang Caspar
Printz (1641-1717). Printz had suggested two ways to compose: the mo-
nodic method in which one wrote a single part and then added others to
it, and the polyodic method in which all the parts were worked out
simultaneously. Printz’s distinction is a late reflection of the shift from
successive composition of voices to simultaneous composition during the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Eighteenth-century musicians reinter-
preted Printz’s terms so that the monodic method meant composing the
main melodic part first, and the polyodic method meant working out the
entire texture at once, as in the approach to composing via thoroughbass
offered by Friderich Erhard Niedt (c. 1674-1708). Mattheson must have
been torn between the two methods. He penned this lament over the
absence of a text on melody only shortly after having edited and overseen
the posthumous publication of Niedt’s thoroughbass method, which is the
epitome of a polyodic approach to composition.

Mattheson’s most comprehensive discussion of melody appears in Part
2 of Der vollkommene Capellmeister, in large part a reworking of materials
in his Kern melodischer Wissenschaft (1737). There are partial discussions
and occasional remarks in works by earlier theorists that cover similar
materials. But the scope of Mattheson’s presentation is unprecedented.

He argues against teaching beginners to compose via either counterpoint
or thoroughbass, instead insisting that students should begin their studies
by composing complete melodies, first vocal, then instrumental. Only after
melodic writing is mastered should the beginner tackle harmonic issues in
two-voiced pieces (Part 1, Chapter 1).

In Part 2, Chapter 4, Mattheson deals with melodic invention, essentially
what we refer to as motives. To stimulate the invention of motives, he
suggests elaborating a chorale (par. 10) or using melodic patterns from

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 173 ===

other compositions (par. 15). The bulk of the chapter explains how to
manipulate these motives via rhythmic changes, permutation, inversion,
repetition, and transposition.

The whole approach is based on the premise that melodic motives need
not be invented anew for every composition. For Mattheson and many of
his contemporaries, a new composition will always contain something old
and something new. (Ratner 1980, Part 1, discusses this issue as an attri-
bute of the Classic style in general.) Some writers called such motives
common to many pieces “figures” (figurae) or “manners” (Manieren).
Long lists of them were common in seventeenth-century works, especially
those dealing with vocal improvisation (such as Herbst 1642 and 1653).
The patterns included trills, mordents, and simple dissonances (passing
tones and neighbors) as well as more elaborate passages, formulas for
recitatives (as in Fux 1725), and so forth. Patterns introduced by one
author for one purpose often ended up in another works being applied
quite differently. For instance, many of Bernhard’s complex dissonant
figures explaining the basis of seconda pratica dissonances turn up in the
Trifolium musicale (1691) of Johann Christoph Stierlein (?-1693) in a
discussion of vocal improvisation. It was from Stierlein’s presentation that
Walther borrowed some of these figures for his Lexicon (Lester 1990).
Theorists throughout the eighteenth century continued to explain melodic
construction according to figures (as in Albrechtsberger 1790, p. 18; the
use of figures in the melodic theories of Riepel and Koch is discussed in
Chapters 10 and 11).

Having introduced motives and their manipulation, Mattheson in Chap-
ter 5 berates Rameau for saying “it is almost impossible to give definite
rules for the use of melody” (Rameau 1722, Book 2, Chapter 20). Matthe-
son enumerates four features that contribute to a good melody: facility,
clarity, flow, and charm. To possess facility, a melody must have something
with which almost everyone is familiar. It follows nature and avoids forced
progressions and great artifice or else hides these features well. Clarity
results from projecting a single passion, following the accent of the words
(if present), avoiding too’much embellishment, and, in general, noble
simplicity. Flow arises when there are no interruptions. And charm arises
from using more steps than large skips, and so forth. Variety too is
important, and Mattheson urges avoiding too many successive semitones,
steps, thirds of one kind, and the like. The remainder of this long chapter
offers numerous examples of each point. Mattheson urges composers to
keep a collection of good and poor melodies by others so they will know
what to emulate and what to avoid (much as schoolboys studying rhetoric
at the time were urged to keep collections of topics, cogent phrases, and
the like).

Chapter 6 deals with melodic rhythm. Mattheson adopts the approach

Mattheson and the Study of Melody

163


=== PAGE 174 ===

164

outlined in Niedt 1706 (which Mattheson revised for a second edition in
1721). Niedt applies variations to a thoroughbass realization, turning it
into various types of dances. Mattheson applies this method to melody
alone, using a simple chorale-like melody as the basis of his variants. He
cites twenty-four types of poetic feet, beginning with those containing two
syllables: the spondee (—— or two half notes), the pyrrhic (~~ or two
eighth notes), the iamb (~— or quarter-half or eighth-quarter), and the
trochee (—~ or half-quarter). He illustrates melodies with one pattern and
with several patterns. Then he adds poetic feet with three and four
syllables.

All these discussions are organized in the manner of contemporaneous
compositional manuals. Much as thoroughbass and counterpoint manuals
offer innumerable voice leadings patterns, Mattheson suggests many pos-
sibilities but gives little if any advice on how to use them. There are no
general rules. But much as a comprehensive thoroughbass manual suggests
a vast range of voice-leading possibilities for exploration, doubtless
Mattheson’s extensive discussions and copious examples awakened many
readers’ imaginations.

Having explained the properties of melodies, Mattheson turns to phras-
ing in Chapter 9. He compares music to language. Just as language has
paragraphs subdivided into phrases and subphrases, musical rhetoric fea-
tures sentences or their subdivisions that add up to a whole structure (par.
5). The end of a musical paragraph requires a full close; the end of a
sentence a lesser but still affirmative close (par. 14), and so forth. Much
of this discussion concerns vocal music, and Mattheson frequently refers
to the text for guidance in composition: commas in the text may be set as
longer notes but without a cadential articulation (pars. 28 and 29); a
semicolon in the text frequently implies separate thoughts, which can be
expressed by a change to a related key, such as A minor to C major;
greater textual contrasts require motion to more distant keys.

Although Mattheson’s discussions are more comprehensive than any
others of the time, he was not the first to treat some of these topics. Among
his predecessors are Printz, who discusses extensively the cadential orien-
tation of phrases (Printz 1676, Part 1, Chapter 8), Fux, who suggests
various possibilities for setting a variety of punctuations in recitatives
(translation in Lester 1989, pp. 205-209), and Niedt (1717, Chapter 6).

Mattheson applies notions associated with language and rhetoric to
explain many of these points: the use of figures, the discussion of rhythm
via poetic feet, the modeling of cadences on punctuation, and the sugges-
tion to use punctuation in a text to determine the cadences. Mattheson
also invokes rhetoric to describe the creative process in general, likening
the various stages of composing to the Dispositio, Elaboratio, and Decor-
atio of an oration (Part 2, Chapter 14, par. I).

Finally, he relates the parts of a completed composition to those of an

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 175 ===

oration: the exordium (introduction), narratio (report), propositio (dis-
course), confirmatio (corroboration by others), comfutatio (refutation of
opposing points of view), and peroratio (conclusion) (par. 4). To illustrate
this, he applies these labels to an aria by Benedetto Marcello (1686-1739)
(pars. 14-22; discussed in Dahlhaus 1989, pp. 224-226). Mattheson’s
application of these labels suggests contrasting attitudes toward the roles
of themes in what we refer to as musical form. When he calls a contrasting
theme a confutatio and a thematic return a confirmatio, he suggest a
defining role for thematic statement and contrast. But elsewhere, his labels
seem to defy such a role. He calls the opening ritornello the exordium and
the opening vocal statement the narratio, which implies that they relate
as prelude and statement. This contradicts the thematic content, which
suggests that the ritornello, which is heard first, is the source of the motives
developed at the vocal entry. On the other hand, these labels support the
sense that the ritornello merely prepares for the important music when
the voice enters. What is perhaps most interesting about his analysis is
that Mattheson does not refer to the text—in effect, he treats the aria as
if it were an instrumental piece with a featured solo part.

Mattheson’s subdivision of a musical work according to the sections of
an argumentative oration—like a much earlier analysis by Joachim Bur-
meister (1564-1629) that applies the sections of an oration as well as
rhetorical figures to a motet by Lassus (Burmeister 1606, English trans-
lation and commentary in Palisca 1972b)—seems more Procrustean than
illuminating to many modern scholars. But it may well be that such
rhetorical parsings were more meaningful to earlier musicians than they
are to us. In the eighteenth century, familiarity with classical rhetoric was
as much a part of an educated person’s background as arithmetic is today.
Among other early-eighteenth-century musicians who make use of rhetor-
ical devices is Heinichen when he advises composers on how to invent
musical figures (Buelow 1966b; general discussion of rhetoric in Buelow
1980a).

Mattheson also uses rhetoric to impart sound musical advice in more
traditional terms, as when he notes “the clever advice of the orators in
offering the strongest points first; then the weaker ones in the middle;
and, finally, convincing conclusions. That certainly seems to be the sort of
trick which a musician can use” (par. 25). Similarly practical advice to
composers also appears elsewhere. He urges the frequent use of imitation
to enliven the texture of a piece because “a discourse pretty soon induces
sleepiness,” whereas imitation is akin to friendly controversy, debate,
objections, and responses (Part 3, Chapter 15, par. 3). Yet Mattheson is
concerned that use of imitation might detract from the quality of the
melody. Even imitative textures should express a specific passion, maintain
a variety of rhythms, and contain good melodies (Chapter 16).

He draws on all this advice in a demonstration of how to compose a

Mattheson and the Study of Melody

165


=== PAGE 176 ===

166

[etc.]

fetc.}

Example 6-6. Mattheson, 1739, Part 3, Chapter 16, par. 6

two-voiced piece (Part 3, Chapter 16). A novice might borrow a bass from
a composition and set a new melody to it, as in Example 6-5. Although
not specified here, Mattheson’s earlier advice on imperfect consonances,
on transposition of motives, on repetitions of rhythms, and on maintaining
variety are evident. Mattheson complains that this version lacks a specific
character and suggests that imitation might provide a remedy (see Example
6-6). The reason that the imitation is so easily accomplished here is that
the opening motive in the right hand in Example 6-5 is a diminution of
the opening of the bass part—Mattheson does not make this point in
connection with this example, but a careful reader would have noted this
after previous discussions of how to draw motives out of chorale melodies.

In essence, such examples and their discussion illustrate the role played
by rhythmic and motivic activity in creating successful musical continu-
ity—aspects of musical structure that had gone unnoted by most earlier
writers. Mattheson returns to this topic in Chapter 23 on double fugue
(fugue with a recurring countersubject), noting that in a successful fugue
there must be rhythmic variety and that the beginnings and endings of
melodic and rhythmic segments in different voices must be kept separate
from one another. He comments on fugues by Johann Kuhnau (1660—
1722), who was Heinichen’s teacher, J. S. Bach’s predecessor at the Tho-
maskirche in Leipzig, and the author of a manuscript treatise on compo-
sition (described in Hahn 1957). He begins with a hypothetical exposition
by a novice on a subject by Kuhnau (see Example 6-7). Among the
problems Mattheson cites are the asterisked rest, the “absurd break at the
end of measure 4,” and the rhythmic similarity of the voices. These are
emended as shown in Example 6-8. Problems remain: there is still no

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 177 ===

“sense of cohesion” at the end of measure 2, there are too many thirds
and no contrary motion, the rhythmic uniformity is boring, the line lacks
direction, and there are no prominent dissonances. Kuhnau’s version is in
Example 6-9. Mattheson praises the interchange of thirds and sixths and
contrary motion in measure 3, the suspensions in measures 4 and 5, the
avoided cadence in measure 5, and the rhythmic variety both within and
between voices. There is no other comparably extensive discussion of
textural, contrapuntal, melodic, and rhythmic issues in any earlier work
(not even in the study of fugue in Fux’s Gradus).

Although Der vollkommene Capellmeister was too comprehensive to be
a practical text for beginners, its sheer volume and valuable perspectives
made it useful for experienced musicians. Haydn apparently worked on it
with the same diligence he applied to Fux’s Gradus (Pohl 1875, 1, p. 175).
And Beethoven owned the treatise, on several occasions copied out ex-

*

SSS SaaS a

Example 6-7. Mattheson 1739, Part 3, Chapter 23, par. 40

Se

Example 6-9. Mattheson 1739, Part 3, Chapter 23, par. 44. In Mattheson 1739, the
opening subject appears erroneously in the soprano, not the alto part.

Mattheson and the Study of Melody


=== PAGE 178 ===

168

amples of particular problems and worked on them, and discussed the
work in later years (Kramer 1975, pp. 92-99).

The emphasis Mattheson places on melodic structure, phrasing, and
cadential articulations became ever more important to theorists in the
latter part of the eighteenth century. Joseph Riepel (1709-1782), who
published the first part of a composition treatise stressing melody thirteen
years after Mattheson’s Vollkommene Capellmeister, acknowledged
Mattheson’s contribution to the study of melody. But Mattheson was not
entirely alone in emphasizing these aspects in the 1730s. For instance,
Walther’s 1732 Lexicon occasionally raises issues of melodic structure,
most prominently when he specifies some of the necessary characteristics
of various dances. The gavotte is “a dance and dance-song [Tanz-Lied]
consisting of two reprises [sections bounded by repeat signs] of which the
first has 4 measures, the second however commonly eight measures in
common time ... The first reprise should not end in the key in which the
gavotte begins but should conclude on the third or fifth.”

Johann Adolph Scheibe (1708-1776) applies similar terms to larger
constructions. An overture, for instance, has three parts. The first part
ends on the dominant (or on the third degree in minor). The fugal second
part, in which the phrases flow into one another, may end on the tonic.
But it is even more effective when the final cadence has some striking
effect, such as a strong dissonance. The last part is like the first but only
has cadences in the tonic (Scheibe 1737-1740, pp. 667-674).

Mattheson as Publicist

In addition to being the first theorist to attempt a comprehensive approach
to melody and texture, Mattheson is also important for propagating newer
musical ideas and in general acting as a commentator on numerous musical
topics. Like his Age of Enlightenment colleagues, Mattheson believed that
the inherited musical knowledge of his age was very much in need of a
thorough housecleaning (to use kis metaphor). His earlier works, especially
“The Newly-Published Orchestre” (Das neu-erdffnete Orchestre) of 1713,
its two sequels published in 1717 and 1721 to respond to critics, and the
journal Critica musica (collected volumes in 1722 and 1725), are marked
by provocative presentations of new ideas along with harsh criticisms of
traditional notions. These pioneering efforts, especially his journal, were
a model for several later writers: the Musikalische Bibliothek (issued
irregularly from 1736-1754) by Lorenz Mizler (1711-1778), Der critische
Musicus (1737-1740) by Scheibe, and the several journals of the 1740s-
17708 published by Friedrich Wilhelm Marpurg (1718-1795), as well as
the more permanent journals and other one-editor publications later in
the century.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 179 ===

Mattheson’s prose style is often quite abrasive and even crass. In a letter
exchange with Fux, he was enraged at Fux’s denigrating remark that
“Hamburg is not the entire musical world” and retorted, “People also live
behind the mountains [Alps]. Here and there in Germany as well as in
England (not to mention France) a small but rich and solid musical culture
emerges far and wide, which ‘the wicked crowd of the Tuscan Street’ [a
Horatian haunt of prostitutes and their customers] has never been able to
find on the map of Castrato-Land” (Lester 1977, p. 55). Elsewhere he
refers to Glarean as “a learned buffoon [Pickelhering] from Glaris, more
skilled at riding a jackass into the lecture hall and playing other tricks
than at writing something of excellence on music” (Mattheson 1739, Part
1, Chapter 9, par. 31). (In this context, his rebukes of Rameau seem mild
indeed.) Such extravagant remarks often miss the mark as reasoned ar-
guments. But they certainly lend his writings an exuberance largely absent
from more modern music theory and scholarly disputes. And they pro-
voked those whose views he criticized to publish rebuttals, bringing into
print various controversies that might otherwise have remained unpub-
lished. Besides being informative for modern scholars, these disputes prob-
ably brought alternative ideas to many German musicians who might not
otherwise have been confronted with them.

For instance, in the Neu-erdffnete Orchestre Mattheson urges numerous
reforms, among them replacing the modes with the twenty-four major and
minor keys—he was only the second German musician (after Heinichen
1711) to publish all twenty-four—and doing away with six-syllable sol-
mization involving hexachordal mutation. The Erfurt organist Johann
Heinrich Buttstett (1666-1727) was sufficiently outraged to respond with
Ut mi sol, re fa la, Tota Musica et harmonia aeterna (c. 1715). Buttstett
favored the church modes over the major-minor keys, supported six-
syllable solmization, and rejected other modern notions, citing ancient
authorities like Boethius and Guido D’Arezzo to support his opinions on
a host of matters.

Mattheson’s response in “The Orchestre Defended” (1717) is as spirited
as its subtitle: “Todte (nicht tota) Musica” (“Dead music, not all music”).
Secretary to the British ambassador in Hamburg and a devotee of the
British legal system, Mattheson dedicated his response to a jury of thirteen
musicians who were to judge the issue. He published the letters he received
from the dedicatees in 1725 under the heading “The Orchestre-Chancel-
lery, or testimonies, letters, declarations, investigations, etc., by the former
judges in the Orchestre trial” (pp. 179-288). Among the respondants was
Fux, the only one to decline the honor of the dedication. Like Buttstett,
Fux rejected major-minor keys and favored six-syllable solmization, show-
ing that such tenets were held in the Catholic, Italian-oriented musical
culture of the south as well as in the Lutheran north.

Mattheson and the Study of Melody

169


=== PAGE 180 ===

170

A full history of the transition from modal thinking and terminology to
major-minor is complex, affecting the seventeenth century more than the
eighteenth. But aspects of modal thinking persisted well past 1700, espe-
cially in German-speaking areas. Besides those writers like Buttstett and
Fux, who reject major and minor keys outright, others, including Andreas
Werckmeister (1645-1706) and Walther, worry that abandoning the
modes might entail losing valuable terminology and concepts. Modal the-
ories in their many forms had at one time or another encompassed not
only the recognition of the final of a piece and its attendant scale, but also
such apparently unrelated notions as modulatory possibilities (via lists of
the cadence points appropriate to each mode) and spacing of voices in a
polyphonic texture (by using plagal and authentic modes in adjacent
voices). Lutheran Protestant musicians also express concern that without
the modes, chorales might be debased. As late as the 1770s, Johann
Kirnberger (1721-1783) is troubled by the growing ignorance of modal
harmony and the resulting trivial treatment of chorale melodies in major-
minor harmonizations (Kirnberger 1771-1779, Vol. 2, p. 47).

In addition to lingering modal thinking among these theorists, even
those writers who present twenty-four keys around the turn of the eigh-
teenth century sometimes tend to treat them in ways that reflect modal
categorizations as much as the modern sense of major and minor. For
instance, the French mathematician Ozanam (1640-1717), apparently the
first to list all twenty-four keys in musical notation (Ozanam 1691, p. 660),
differentiates the twenty-four keys into three categories according to the
old hexachords: the “natural modes” containing only white notes and Bb,
the “chromatic natural modes” built on white notes or Bb with black notes
in their scales, and the “transposed modes” built on black notes. Matthe-
son in 1713 still divides the twenty-four keys into three groups of eight,
the first of which are a traditional listing of keys evolved from the church
modes (pp. 60-62), although other theorists had presented all twenty-four
keys as equally original (Janowka 1701, Brossard 1703, Frére 1706, and
Heinichen 1711).

Early-eighteenth-century writers who accept major and minor keys also
disagree on the proper scale and signature of the minor mode. The A-
mode, the D-mode, what we call the melodic minor scale, and what we
call the harmonic minor scale were all proposed. Janowka 1701 argues
for the A-mode because using the D-mode requires many extra accidentals
during a piece (pp. 290-293). Campion 1716 recognizes what we call the
separate ascending and descending forms of the melodic minor scale
(p. 13), which causes him to advocate D-mode signatures because he sees
just as little reason to incorporate the lowered sixth degree into the sig-
nature as to incorporate the raised seventh. And Brossard 1703 advocates
what we call the harmonic minor scale because he regards the raised

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 181 ===

or: do re mi fa or; do re mi fa
do re mi fa sol la mi fa te mi fa sol la re mi fa

(Se Sg

G major: E minor:

Example 6-10. Albrechtsberger 1790, p. 1

seventh and lowered sixth degrees as the primary components of chords
(article Modo).

The maintenance of many aspects of modal theory, especially in Ger-
many, through much of the eighteenth century is the subject of Between
Modes and Keys: German Theory 1592-1802 by the present author. The
reader is urged to consult that work (Lester 1989) for a more thorough
consideration of eighteenth-century modal theory.

The ideas expressed by Buttstett and Fux, as well as those of Franz
Xaver Anton Murschhauser (1663-1738), author of a 1721 treatise de-
signed “to bring a little more light to the excellent Herr Mattheson,” and
others need not be viewed solely as outmoded notions on their way to
extinction. These and other tenets help give us a more rounded picture of
the musical ideas circulating at the time. For instance, many German-
speaking eighteenth-century musicians quite probably learned their musi-
cal ABCs while they were choirboys, using Lateinschul manuals whose
contents had remained relatively unchanged since the mid-sixteenth cen-
tury. The last extant edition of one of these works, the Breviarium musi-
cum by Johann Quirsfeld (1642-1686), was published in Dresden in 1717,
where Heinichen had just arrived. Quirsfeld’s work is quite similar in
content to the 1548 Compendiolum musicae pro incipientibus by Heinrich
Faber (?—15 52), teaching the basics of pitch notation, mensural notation,
solmization, and the church modes (absent from Faber 1548, but included
in many derivative works).! It bears repeating here that Haydn, as a
choirboy in St. Stephens in Vienna while Fux was still its musical director,
quite probably learned six-syllable solmization with hexachordal
mutation.

Six-syllable solmization persisted at least through the 1790 composition
manual by Johann Georg Albrechtsberger (1736-1809), which presents
the major and minor scales on its opening page with syllables as shown
in Example 6-10. In both major-scale syllabifications, the tonic appears as
do and fa; and in the upper syllabification, do denotes both the tonic and
the dominant. In the minor scale, re is used for both the tonic and the
raised form of scale-step 6. It gives one pause to realize that Beethoven,

1. The most complete studies of these Lateinschul manuals are Preussner 1924 and
Allerup 1931. Lester 1989, pp. 68-76, surveys their discussions of modes.

Mattheson and the Study of Melody

171


=== PAGE 182 ===

172

who worked from this text when he studied with Albrechtsberger only a
couple of years later, was familiar with a solmization system in which the
tonic of a key could appear with more than one syllable, and in which the
syllable denoting the tonic could also denote another scale degree. Modern,
seven-syllable solmization methods, whether based on fixed or movable
do, always link the tonic with a single syllable in a passage within a single
key.

In evaluating the role of such tenets in the conceptual world of the time
it is important to remember that their absence from other works may not
necessarily indicate their absence from common musical parlance. When
Mattheson challenged the strength of Fux’s advocacy of six-syllable sol-
mization, asking why Fux had never written about it, Fux responded: “I
have never had any reason to doubt the usefulness of this invention, and
have never thought to write about it” (Lester 1977, p. 51).

Nature, Mathematics, and Science

Like his Enlightenment colleagues elsewhere, Mattheson exalts Nature and
often uses mathematics and reason to defend his positions. There are both
similarities and differences in the way he applies these concepts and the
way Rameau applies them. Like Rameau, Mattheson is aware of the
intervals that arise on a natural horn (Mattheson 1739, Part 1, Chapter
7, par. 72) and recommends reading the works of Sauveur (Part 1, Chapter
3, par. 27). But he does not mention harmonic resonance. Also like Ra-
meau, Mattheson is convinced that since music is natural, the hearing of
the musically uneducated can serve as proof for his arguments. For in-
stance, he argues that scalar differences between the Mixolydian and
Ionian modes are unessential because a hypothetical Thuringian peasant
would not be able to hear the difference between the lowered and raised
forms of scale-step 7 (Mattheson 1717, p. 82). But consistency is not his
strongest suit; elsewhere he argues that barely audible microtonal variants
in tuning are important in differentiating one key from another (Lester
1977; Pp. 48-49 and 60).

Unlike Rameau, Mattheson will have nothing to do with systematization
that proceeds from first principles such as resonance or Nature to create
a harmonic theory. He recognizes that “Nature (the force present in every
thing which, on God’s command, produces and sustains every thing)
produces sound and all its proportions.” These proportions are indispen-
sible, for mathematics is a “diligent, industrious aid, and a useful, inde-
fatigable, and noble servant.” But mathematics is not the “heart and soul
of music.” “Music draws its water from the spring of nature and not from
the puddles of arithmetic” (Mattheson 1739, Foreword, section 6).

Like some of his contemporaries, Mattheson is fascinated by one aspect

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 183 ===

of mathematics: permutations (discussed in Ratner 1970). He uses per-
mutations to generate broken-chord figurations (Mattheson 1739, Part
3, Chapter 18) and rhythmic patterns, noting that if each of twenty-
four different rhythmic patterns appeared once in a_ melody,
62,044,840,173,323,943,936,030 possibilities would arise, although he
does not explain his calculation (Part 2, Chapter 6, par. 52). He rejects
the proposition that the supply of novel melodies might someday be
exhausted since their number is so huge, introducing as one example the
number of possible melodies using each note in the chromatic octave only
once (twelve-tone rows!): 479,001,600 or 12! (Mattheson 1725, pp.
6-7).

Two Oddities

No survey of theoretical works published through the mid-eighteenth
century would be complete without mention of two unique approaches to
composition published in England just after the middle of the century, one
apparently serious, the other humorous. The first is the Guida armonica,
o dizionario armonico (c. 1754?) of Francesco Geminiani (1687-1762),
the Italian violinist-composer who lived in England after 1714. As he
explains in the preface, Geminiani was distressed by the lack of novelty
in compositions, particularly the fact that so many pieces are based on the
same harmonic progressions. To promote variety, he offers his glossary
containing hundreds of figured bass progressions between two and five
notes in length for novices to use. Each progression is followed by an
annotation directing the reader to continue his piece by turning to specified
other pages and selecting any of the progressions there, continuing this
process until a progression ends with a some sort of cadence (indicated
by a fermata or a double fermata). Subsequent phrases are constructed in
the same manner. At the very end of the work, Geminiani notes that “by
observing the foregoing Directions it is impossible for the most ignorant
to err. But the good Effect of the Melody and Harmony will be greater or
less, according to the Choice of the Passages”—quite an understatement!
Apparently readers found the work confusing, for Geminiani soon pro-
vided A Supplement to the Guida Armonica, with Examples. Here he
works out a number of examples from the Guida and realizes them in
different numbers of voices and various meters.

A more curious work by the English organist and composer William

2. The frontispiece, which includes an image of the Guida, is dated 1741. But evidence
in McArtor 1951 points to a date around 1754 (Ladewig 1980). In addition, Serre 1753
announces that Geminiani “will soon publish” the Guida, “whose title is already known”
(fol. 1°).

Mattheson and the Study of Melody

173


=== PAGE 184 ===

174

Hayes (1708-1777) is a satire on instruction manuals for amateurs. The
Art of Composing Music by a Method entirely New, suited to the meanest
capacity (London, 1751; summarized in Deutsch 1952) suggests that one
acquire a small brush or Spruzzarino and follow these directions:

Take a Gallipot {a small jar], put therein Ink of what Colour you please; lay
a Sheet of ruled Paper on your Harpsichord or Table; then dip the Spruz-
zarino into the Gallipot; when you take it out again shake off the superfluous
Liquid; then take the fibrous or hairy Part betwixt the Fore-finger and Thumb
of your Left hand, pressing them close together, and hold it to the Lines and
Spaces you intend to sprinkle; then draw the Fore-finger of your Right-hand
gently over the Ends thereof, and you will see a Multiplicity of Spots on the
Paper; this repeat as often as you have occasion .. . This done. . . take your
Pen and proceed to the placing of the Cliffs or Keys at the Beginning, marking
the Bars, and forming the Spots into Crotchets, Quavers, &c. as your Fancy
shall prompt you . . . this done, season it with Flats and Sharps to your
Taste. (pp. 29-30)

Hayes directed the satire to his compatriot Barnabas Gunn (?—1753), who
apparently took the joke in stride, publishing Twelve English Songs . . .
Set to Musick by the New-Invented Method of Composing with the Spruz-
zarino (London, 1752). Mid-twentieth-century avant-garde composers ex-
perimenting with similar aleatoric processes probably had no idea that
their technique had been so thoroughly discussed and utilized two centuries
earlier.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 185 ===

Oe gus ee a

Ze ae

Harmonic Perspectives
on Counterpoint

THE PRECEDING CHAPTERS show how a chordal perspective on voice
leading and harmony went from being a peripheral area of compositional
theory early in the eighteenth century to become a central concern by mid-
century. Beginning with the 1750s, chord-inversion and root-progression
thinking is an organizing force in virtually every music-theory document:
in speculative treatises on harmony as well as practical counterpoint or
thoroughbass manuals, in discussions of melody and style as well as
composition treatises, in works designed for professionals as well as those
for amateurs, in musical dictionaries as well as keyboard primers, in works
published in all regions of Europe, and in records of private instruction
(such as W. A. Mozart’s teaching).

Indeed, the differences among these categories are not always what
seems obvious to us. In particular, the distinction between publications
designed for amateurs and those aimed at professionals was not as sharply
drawn in the eighteenth century as it is today. A major premise of the
Enlightenment was that with diligence and reason, an educated person
could learn much about any topic. Popularizations of music theory were
no less prevalent than popularizations of Newtonian mechanics. In music
theory, to be sure, many insubstantial publications for or by amateurs
would have had little if any use to a professional musician. But weightier
works were often intended for musically literate amateurs as well as
professionals. No less a figure than Johann Nicolaus Forkel (1749-1818),
the “founder of modern musicology” (Duckles 1980), argued cogently in
1777 that every educated person should know music theory. Numerous
title pages announced works intended for “beginners and those with ex-
perience” (Marpurg 1755-1762). Other works as well imply such multiple
use, even substantial tomes like the 1790 Griindliche Anweisung zur Com-


=== PAGE 186 ===

176

position “for self-instruction” by the Viennese pedagogue Johann Georg
Albrechtsberger (1736-1809). Some theorists known for serious tomes
also wrote for amateurs. For instance, Johann Philipp Kirnberger (1721-
1783), one of the most important theorists of the second half of the
century, published two parlor-game pamphlets: a 1757 dice game for
composing menuets and polonaises and a 1783 method for “tossing off
sonatas.” And C. P. E. Bach (1714-1788) published in 1757 a dice game
for composing invertible counterpoint “without knowing the rules.” The
thinking behind these apparent trifles can sometimes illuminate the more
serious works by these theorists.

Likewise, works whose principal subject matter we might be inclined to
place under one theoretical category often deal with other topics as well.
As happened earlier in the century, discussions of composition turned up
in thoroughbass methods (C. P. E. Bach 1762 and Marpurg 1755-1762),
counterpoint treatises (Albrechtsberger 1790), and harmony treatises (Ra-
meau [1761] and Kirnberger 1771-1779). C. P. E. Bach’s keyboard manual
had a companion volume on thoroughbass and applications to composi-
tion (just like other keyboard manuals earlier in the century), serving as
model for popular works of similar structure by Georg Simon Lohlein
(172§—1781) in editions from 1765-1848 and by Michael Johann Fried-
rich Wideburg (1720-1800) in 1765-1775. In his 1755 keyboard manual,
Friedrich Wilhelm Marpurg (1718-1795) includes a substantial discussion
of nonharmonic tones within a section on ornamentation.

It is not surprising, therefore, that the same perspective that informs
discussions of harmony per se is also evident in other aspects of music
theory. The various manifestations of chordal thinking in all these genres
after the middle of the century are the subject of this and the next two
chapters. The present chapter deals with documents involving counterpoint
during the second half of the eighteenth century. The next two chapters
survey other works of this period and describe the general agreement of
much of the musical community on viewing most matters from a harmonic
perspective, despite doctrinal differences.

As with any generality, there are exceptions to the prevailing harmonic
viewpoint in the later eighteenth century. A number of thoroughbass
methods that remained in print into the nineteenth century avoid any
explicit mention of Rameauian perspectives on chord structures, chord
inversions, and chord progressions (including Pasquali 1757, appearing in
English as well as a French translation through the early nineteenth cen-
tury, and a method first appearing in the 1790s under Albrechtsberger’s
name), especially partimento thoroughbass instructors that simply offer
patterns for rote memorization. Two more substantial works falling into
this category are C. P. E. Bach’s 1762 thoroughbass manual and the

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 187 ===

publications on melody by Joseph Riepel (1709-1782) (discussed in Chap-
ter 10). But even these works tacitly acknowledge chordal thinking. As
already noted in Chapter 3, C. P. E. Bach orders his chapters according
to Rameau’s chordal theories: triads and their inversions, most seventh
chords, and then what Rameau would have included under chords by
subposition. No pre-Rameau thoroughbass writer organized harmonies in
this manner. Riepel’s works, which also do not discuss chordal theory,
nevertheless build the essence of musical structure from what Heinrich
Christoph Koch (1749-1816) in the 1780s called “melody conceived
harmonically.”

Some recent theorists and historians believe that although theories re-
flecting Rameau’s harmonic perspective were widespread during the later
eighteenth century, the truly musical approach of educated musicians and
of the great composers of the time is represented by other evidence of the
period: C. P. E. Bach’s thoroughbass treatise, Albrechtsberger’s composi-
tion manual of 1790, Fuxian counterpoint as in the records of Haydn’s
and Mozart’s teachings, the stile antico studies of Padre Martini, and
linear aspects in Kirnberger’s treatises. Scholars espousing this perspective
envision a composition method in which linear species counterpoint and
thoroughbass, uninhibited by and even ignoring chordal and root-pro-
gression considerations, leads directly to free composition. To these his-
torians, the famous theoretical squabble in Berlin between Marpurg and
Kirnberger in the 1770s was a battle between chordal and linear thinking,
and resulted in the rejection of a chordal perspective in favor of a linear
voice-leading approach.

As shown in this and the next two chapters, this perspective is based in
large part on imposing twentieth-century theoretical schisms onto eigh-
teenth-century evidence and misreading some eighteenth-century evidence.
In fact, there was a remarkable degree of conceptual unity among the
various schools of late eighteenth-century theory concerning the basic
nature of musical structure. Theorists and practicing musicians were com-
fortably at home mixing what we might consider the separate perspectives
of linear and harmonic thinking. Nowhere is the basic unity underlying
different perspectives more apparent than in the contrapuntal theory and
practice surveyed in this chapter. Species counterpoint exercises and coun-
terpoint in the stile antico may seem to us evidence of linear instruction
from a perspective uninfluenced by invertible chords and root progressions.
But in the eighteenth century, major theorists and teachers including Al-
brechtsberger, Martini, and Mozart explicitly explain counterpoint from
a chordal point of view. To them, teaching the principles of good lines
and good interaction among lines went hand in hand with teaching har-
monic structures and harmonic progressions.

Harmonic Perspectives on Counterpoint

177


=== PAGE 188 ===

178

Padre Martini

Giovanni Battista Martini (1706-1784), Bolognese composer, theorist,
teacher, and scholar, was one of the major musical authorities of the age.
He collected a library of over 17,000 treatises and scores, and was con-
sulted by many of the important musicians of the time. His major publi-
cations are Storia della musica (1757-1781), a three-volume history of
music through Greek antiquity, and Esemplare o sia saggio fondamentale
pratico di contrappunto sopra il canto fermo [1774-1775], a huge collec-
tion of annotated musical scores mostly from the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. The first volume contains nonfugal works, the second fugal
works,

The Esemplare stands as a monument to the eternal verities of the stile
antico. Though it spells out the basic rules of counterpoint in Volume 1
(pp. xix—xxviii), Martini’s work is not a counterpoint text in the usual
sense. Rather it is a collection of scores with annotations presumably
reflecting the topics Martini taught: imitation, voice leading, motives,
texture, text setting, and harmony. Martini cites numerous theorists from
the Renaissance through the eighteenth century.

Because of Martini’s interest in the stile antico and his failure to support
Rameau’s application for membership in the Bologna Accademia delle
scienze, some modern scholars have viewed Martini as the last major
figure in the line of Italian-tradition contrapuntists relatively uninfluenced
by harmonic theory—in the line stretching from Zarlino and Artusi
through the seventeenth century and Fux. But numerous aspects of the
Esemplare itself and of Martini’s overall musical activity make it clear
that although he felt it important to show young composers that styles
other than modern theatrical music existed (p. xiii), his perspective on this
music was that of a harmony-oriented theorist of the eighteenth century.
As already noted in Chapter 5, Martini’s principal complaint against
Rameau may have had less to do with theoretical matters than with what
he perceived as Rameau’s exaltation of hedonistic theatrical music.

Despite these philosophical differences with Rameau, Martini places
Rameau’s perspective at the core of his notion of counterpoint, wedding
harmonic theory and traditional rules of the stile antico. His very first rule
of counterpoint, for instance, is the ancient prescription to begin and end
a piece with perfect consonances (p. xix).! Martini recasts the rule in terms
of harmonic theory: beginnings and endings “should form the perfect
harmony.” A footnote directs the reader to p. 177, where Martini explains
that the perfect harmony is the major triad, source of all consonances,

1. Tinctoris 1477, Book 3, Chapter 1, first rule: “All counterpoint ought to begin and
end with a perfect concord”; likewise in Gafori 1496, Book 3, Chapter 3, rules 1 and 8.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 189 ===

Sea

Example 7-1. Martini [1774-1775], 1, p. 227

including 6/3 and 6/4 chords, which are inversions against the “funda-
mental note” (nota fondamentale).

Martini likewise interprets harmonic progressions in his musical ex-
amples according to Rameauian harmonic theory. Pages 224-228, for
instance, discuss which scale degrees merit 5/3 and which merit 6/3 chords.
Writing in a vein reminiscent of Rameau, Martini raises the problematic
harmonic relationship of root progressions by step; his solution invokes
parts of Rameau’s theory of double emploi in all but the term itself:

We can avoid [root progression by step] in two ways: first by going through
an intermediate tone between the two indicated notes, and this happens by
ascending or descending a fifth or fourth [see Example 7-1]. . . . However,
the leading masters do this only occasionally; every day the masters of our
age use another means to avoid the displeasure that the ear receives from the
immediate progression of two adjacent tones accompanied by a fifth [root
progression by step]. This consists in accompanying the first note with a fifth
and then changing the accompaniment of the fifth to a sixth above the same
note, thereby removing that annoyance that the ear receives as follows [see
Example 7-2]. By this means the problem is removed according to all the
laws of voice leading [Modulazione] described above. What makes that
progression agreeable is that with the double accompaniment of the fifth and
sixth on the first note, the progression becomes an ascending fourth or
descending fifth, as [in Example 7-3].

The importance of this issue to Martini is clear when he repeats it within
the rules for fugue that open the second volume. His régle de l’octave
(called Table for Progressions; Tavola per la modulazione) contains 5/3
chords on scale-steps 4 and 5. But he warns that “even though the fourth

5 6 3
3 3

Example 7-2. Martini [1774-1775], 1, p. 227

Example 7-3. Martini [1774-1775], 1, p. 228

Harmonic Perspectives on Counterpoint

179


=== PAGE 190 ===

180

of the key is adjacent to the fifth, one should still not progress [far
passaggio] immediately from one to the other, but should instead observe
what is prescribed in the first volume on pages 226-227” (p. xxxvii, fold-
out).

Martini also writes out fundamental basses to a number of examples,
explaining that such an analisi will demonstrate that

all the notes can be reduced to the direct accompaniment of third and fifth,
with the addition of the seventh, and sometimes even the ninth. Such an
added bass only serves to demonstrate to young composers how the succes-
sion of harmonies [Modulazione], in order that it be natural and not offend
the ear, reduces to ordinary progressions [Modulazione], for it proceeds
almost always by ascending or descending a fourth or fifth except, as just
mentioned, in progressing from one tone to another quite foreign tone. (Vol.

2, PP. 114-115)

Martini applies such fundamental basses to a seventeenth-century anti-
phon by Francesco Foggia (1604-1688) (Vol. 2, p. 55) and an Adoramus
te by Antonio Pacchioni (1654-1738) (pp. 112-115). Martini’s funda-
mental bass and accompanying commentary for the latter excerpt (in
Example 7-4) cite a C’ chord at the end of m. 1 (not indicated in Pac-
chioni’s thoroughbass) that avoids the stepwise root progression from G
to F. Martini uses an interpolated bass between measures 2 and 3 to avoid
another stepwise progression, a chord progression to explain suspensions
(mm. 2, 5, 7, 10, Ir), a dominant ninth to explain diminished-seventh
chords (mm. 4, 8), and a dominant seventh to explain a diminished triad
(mm. 6, 10). Among items of particular interest are Martini’s analysis of
the suspension patterns in measures 5, 7, and 11, which ignore the deco-
rated resolution of the suspension and introduce syncopated harmonic
rhythm into the fundamental bass; his assertion of A as the fundamental
bass in m. 8; and an explanation for the last chord in the first measure
that contains a cross-reference to the discussion of 5—6 motions from
volume 1, p. 227 (translated above).

These discussions and many other passages in the Esemplare make it
clear that however Martini felt about the importance of knowing and
respecting the stile antico, however much one could learn in that style
about voice leading, texture, motives, imitation, and the like, and however
important it was to be able to base modern practices on the foundation
of the stile antico, his interpretation of that music was not divorced from
the harmonically directed root-progression considerations of his own time.
Similarly, Martini’s own compositions in the newer styles are primarily
homophonic, exhibiting little of even the rudimentary polyphony of his
compatriot Giovanni Battista Sammartini (c. 1700-1775) (Brofsky 1980).

Confirming this interpretation of Martini’s views on the stile antico and

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 191 ===

Pacchioni’s 5. Of > U
thoroughbass: 3 3 Hf & 5 3
== 2 =e as

Martini’s
fundamental bass:

4
t
Ml

1 % v p >
5 3 3 }
FA) ce’ 4, | 3 Ey

Example 7-4. Martini [1774-1775], 2, pp. 112-115. Text omitted. Some notations
modernized. The first flat in the continuo is not a key signature, but an archaic
thoroughbass notation indicating the minor third above G in the opening chord.
It is unclear whether 5/3 in the thoroughbass in mm. 5 and 7, and 6/4 in m. 6,
should appear on the second or third quarter

contemporaneous harmonic theory is the presence of the same features in
a similar collection of scores that Martini had his pupil Giuseppe Paolucci
(1726-1776) prepare just a few years earlier: Arte pratica di contrappunto
dimostrata con esempi di vari autori e con osservazioni (3 volumes: Venice,
1765, 1766, 1772). Similar to Martini’s Esemplare in layout, size (over
800 pages), and content, and prefaced by Martini’s recommendation, the
Arte pratica contains examples in two and more parts from an even wider
range of styles and periods than Martini’s Esemplare. Paolucci even in-
cludes stile antico pieces by Martini. The commentary, apparently based
on Martini’s teaching (Mann 1965b, p. 60), deals with motives, counter-
point, harmony, and so forth. Like Martini, Paolucci draws on authorities
ranging from Gafori through Rameau and applies a root-progression per-
spective when issues of harmony and voice leading arise. He shows how

Harmonic Perspectives on Counterpoint

f
==

181


=== PAGE 192 ===

182

a diminished fifth over the bass is really the seventh of a dominant-seventh
chord (Vol. 1, p. 25), he shows how to invert chords (p. 74), and he notes
that tonic, subdominant (sottodominante), and dominant are the principal
notes of the key (p. 171). The Italian theorist Francesco Antonio Vallotti
(1697-1780), maestro di cappella from 1730-1780 in Padua, also con-
tributed a recommendation to Paolucci’s preface. In his own treatise, most
of which remained in manuscript until the twentieth century, Vallotti
stresses the structural importance of the fundamental bass: “because it
should always be present in the mind of the composer, I state that the
other parts should be regulated and distributed above that bass” (Vallotti

1950, Part 3, p. 335).

Mozart as Composition Teacher

Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1756-1791) left no formal work in any area
of music theory.2 However, the extant records of his activity as a com-
position teacher are among the most important documents we possess
concerning composition instruction in the later eighteenth century (Lester
1993). Two published sets of such exercises with Mozart’s corrections are
particularly relevant here: (1) studies from 1784 that circumstantial evi-
dence strongly suggests were by Barbara Ployer (1765-after 1811), a piano
student of Mozart to whom he dedicated the piano concertos K.449 and
K.453 (Mozart 1784); and (2) studies from 1785-1786 by Thomas Att-
wood (1765-1838), an English composer and organist (Mozart 1785—
1786).

The Attwood studies are considerably more extensive, possibly because
the Ployer studies as they now exist may be incomplete. But both sets
contain the same types of exercises, except for melodic harmonization, a
task Mozart gave to Ployer as well as to an earlier Parisian pupil (Anderson
1966, letter of May 14, 1778) but not to Attwood. There are extensive
species counterpoint exercises in varying numbers of voices (especially in
the Attwood studies), bass parts or bass-soprano frames with or without
thoroughbass figures to fill in, fugal and canonic studies, and free com-
position, mostly in the form of minuets.

Interestingly, despite the fact that Mozart and both of his students were
keyboard players, many harmony and composition exercises are laid out
in string quartet format (two treble clefs, alto clef, and bass clef), even
where the exercise merely involves filling in harmonies over a figured bass
part. This is a distinct change from thoroughbass approaches to compo-
sitional instruction earlier in the century where working with keyboard

2. A thoroughbass manual that has appeared under his name in several editions since
the nineteenth century is clearly not his (Federhofer 1971-1972, p. 100).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 193 ===

texture was the norm. Thoroughbass here is used primarily for practicing
voice leading, not for extempore realization or as a model to be elaborated
to become a composition, as is the case earlier in the century.

The extensive sets of counterpoint exercises, the use of string quartet
texture for thoroughbass realizations, and the ubiquitous emphasis on
writing good lines show the paramount importance Mozart paid to linear
aspects of music. In one species counterpoint exercise Mozart acknowl-
edges that a note is technically correct, but still complains that “clearly it
is only present to avoid going from one perfect consonance to another in
direct motion—just like poor poets often write something idiotic to please
the rhyme scheme” (Mozart 1784, fol. 11°).

However, just as in Martini’s Esemplare and Paolucci’s Arte Pratica,
Mozart’s emphasis on linear aspects of music in no way prevents him
from understanding the resulting chords in terms of root progressions. He
was fully conversant with chord inversions and fundamental bass. In the
Attwood studies there are examples illustrating inversions of triads (p. 30,
in Mozart’s hand) and seventh chords (p. 22), fundamental-bass expla-
nations (p. 38, in both Mozart’s and Attwood’s hands), and fundamental-
bass analyses (pp. 167-173).

Fundamental bass is even more prominent in the Ployer studies, where
it is central to melodic harmonization. Mozart provided several melodies.
Either he or Ployer worked out a fundamental-bass analysis of the mel-
ody—a fundamental bass to one melody is in Ployer’s hand (fol. 1°) and
for another in Mozart’s hand (fol. 3"). Ployer then composed a bass part
using notes largely from the chords in the fundamental bass. Example 7-
5 is the opening of the first such harmonization. Staff 1 shows the melody,
staff 2 Ployer’s fundamental bass analysis, staff 3 her first bass line, staff
4 its revision, presumably after Mozart made corrections, and staff 5
Mozart’s own bass using similar root progressions. All the versions appear
here one under the other to facilitate comparison. In the original, they
appear separately.

As in most records of compositional instruction, only the successive
versions survive, not the conversations that took place between teacher
and pupil to evaluate the earlier versions. According to the written evi-
dence, Mozart probably notated the melody and asked Ployer to work out
the fundamental bass and first harmonization on her own. The D-minor
and F-major chords in measure 6 confirm that Ployer completed this
without Mozart’s assistance. In fact, the editor of the Neue Mozart Aus-
gabe finds the F chord so preposterous that he changes the fundamental-
bass F to F# without even indicating an editorial emendation(!). Neverthe-
less, Ployer clearly intended F4. Ff is not possible in the fundamental bass,
since it indicates a diminished triad, which is not a fundamental chord-
type. And Ployer continues in the key of C in the next measure, deceptively

Harmonic Perspectives on Counterpoint

183


=== PAGE 194 ===

gees SE ator
oe

Student’s first bass part:

2S SS SSS

i

Hh
i

de ‘cond bi 33
Student's se ass: § § 6 § oF 9} stots ie #7
Fe seine! SiS aS Ss
f t
Mozart's bass: 7 3 b6 6 ‘4 ss $8

SSH Sess Hae

Example 7-5. Mozart 1784, fol. 1°

resolving a G’ to an A-minor triad in the fundamental bass. (That she
does not utilize this progression in her actual bass line confirms that the
fundamental bass was worked out before the actual bass part.)

How could Ployer have composed a harmonization that so clearly goes
against the grain of the melody? Quite simply, she diligently followed
standard eighteenth-century teaching and regarded each sharp in the mel-
ody as a chromatic leading tone, part of what we call a secondary domi-
nant. Her error is that she assumed the FH (m. 5) and C# (m. 6) are
temporary leading tones and she kept the phrase within C major. Mozart
probably explained that the F# in measure 5 and the coming cadence on
G signal a more significant key change, for Ployer corrected this in the
next version. Mozart probably also suggested a more conjunct bass, for
her next solution is better in this respect. But if he mentioned the unre-
solved leading tone in measure 4 or the peculiar 6/4 chords in measures
I, 35 5, and elsewhere, Ployer did not understand how to correct these
problems.

Mozart finally provided his own bass, generally retaining the chords in
Ployer’s second version. In explaining the superiority of his harmonization,
he probably talked to her about using chords belonging to the key, avoid-
ing improper 6/4 chords, resolving leading tones and chord sevenths, and
watching contour, thereby repeating advice found in many contempora-
neous treatises. But beyond those technical matters, Mozart’s bass ex-
presses structural features that seem to have been beyond his ability to
explain verbally. For instance, in measures 1-5 the melody moves to or

184 Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 195 ===

through scale step 3 three times, each time in a progressively stronger
metric position. Mozart supports all three Es with a root-position tonic
chord. In measures 2 and 4, the motion to the tonic in the melody is
harmonized with a voice exchange. His bass then highlights the E on
measure 5, the pivot in the modulation to the dominant, by the extraor-
dinarily graceful rest and change of register—as if to say that having finally
reached the main melodic note on a metric strong point its support could
be delayed for an instant, thereby separating the end of the antecedent
from the consequent that contains the change of key. Similarly strategic
choices of harmonic support, rhythm, and contour characterize all of
Mozart’s solutions.

But Ployer never caught on. Although Mozart sometimes helped her
choose good chords by writing out the fundamental bass himself (or
perhaps writing it down as he worked it out with her), each of her later
harmonizations yields clumsy bass lines. Mozart could compose a beautiful
bass line, but he most likely could explain his choices only in terms of a
smooth bass and avoiding problematic resolutions and progressions. Oth-
erwise his method of teaching harmonization was probably that suggested
by Rameau’s theory: work out a good fundamental-bass progression and
choose well among the alternatives it suggests—a method still used by
many harmony texts. For him, attending to point-to-point harmonic think-
ing in this manner while keeping the large-scale linear and structural
aspects of the music in mind was not a problem. But he seems to have
had no way to communicate this.3

3. Helmut Federhofer, Daniel Heartz, and Alfred Mann evaluate Mozart’s use of fun-
damental bass quite differently than argued here. In their commentary on the Ployer studies
in the Neue Mozart Ausgabe, Federhofer and Mann suggest that Mozart had Ployer abandon
the fundamental bass after her very first harmonization. Federhofer also agrees with Heartz’s
assertion that Mozart used fundamental bass “merely as a teaching tool by which the
student would have before his eyes the root of all inverted chords” (Federhofer 1978-1979,
Pp. 173; same citation in Neue Mozart Ausgabe X,30,2, p. xi). But the maintenance of the
same chords from version to version (after the problematic modulation was corrected) and
the fact that Mozart himself furnished the fundamental bass for Ployer in the next two
harmonizations suggest instead that the fundamental bass was not written anew under each
version of each harmonization simply because it was already present from the first
harmonization.

Elsewhere, Mann argues by contrast that Mozart’s teaching, based on Rameau and
Marpurg, probably reflects the training he himself received (Mann 1978-1979, p. 198).
Mozart’s use of fundamental bass is indeed like Marpurg’s in that Mozart, like Marpurg,
sees no problems with step progressions in the fundamental bass. But in that Mozart explains
cadential 6/4 chords both with a tonic fundamental bass (Ployer studies, fol. 1°; and even
on fol. 9° where this creates syncopated harmonic rhythm) and also as suspensions over
the dominant (fol. 3°, m. 4), he was more likely following no particular theorist closely.
Cecil Oldman thus errs on p. x of the preface to the Attwood studies when he writes that

Harmonic Perspectives on Counterpoint

185


=== PAGE 196 ===

186

Mozart's correction:

©)
E

: ie iee tear acres toate ere sraseae

Example 7-6. Mozart 1784, fol. 11°

An even more striking instance of Mozart’s harmonic perspective occurs
in the species counterpoint exercises in the Ployer studies. Although most
exercises are corrected without any written comments, some pages do
include explanations of the reasons for errors, possibly because Mozart
corrected these exercises between formal lessons. One such page includes
the two-voiced exercise in second species shown in Example 7-6. Mozart
comments about the B in the eighth measure: “The sixth cannot be used
here, for each measure must begin with a perfect chord—with the octave,
fifth, third; or with a sixth that has a perfect chord as its basis. Here,
however, the perfect chord would be B with the false [diminished] fifth
which cannot exist.” Mozart clearly believed that intervals in two-voiced
species counterpoint were not to be evaluated as intervals, but as parts of
a consonant root-position or first-inversion triad.

Although there seems to be no other explicit discussion of the voice
leading that Mozart censures (B-D over a D in two-part writing in second
species or in a comparable rhythmic position in any other species) in any
eighteenth-century counterpoint manual, the voice leading does not in fact
appear in any counterpoint manual of the time (in Fux’s Gradus, Mozart’s
Ployer and Attwood studies, or Albrechtsberger 1790). A sixth represent-
ing a diminished triad can only arise in the white-note scale when B appears
over D. (Every other white-note sixth forms the root and third of a major
or minor triad.) Mozart does not cite B over D in second species (even in
the immediately preceding exercise) when the B is followed by a conjunct
motion to A. Apparently he believed that only the skip from B to D caused
the sense of a diminished triad being prolonged. (Only a skip from B to
D will create this problem; from B no other note consonant with D is
within reach by an allowable skip.)

Mozart follows Kirnberger’s approach to fundamental bass. Mozart may well have learned
fundamental bass from a variety of sources, since as shown in Chapter 8, its widespread
acceptance in German theory antedates both Marpurg’s and Kirnberger’s writings.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 197 ===

Mozart’s insistence that species counterpoint was to be worked out
thinking of chords agrees fully with Albrechtsberger’s instructions for
species counterpoint, published only six years later. Albrechtsberger tells
the student to figure out the proper triad to which each note of a cantus
firmus belongs before beginning to write a two-part species counterpoint
(discussed below). Since Mozart may well have learned strict-style species
counterpoint from his contacts with Haydn (Mann 1978-1979, p. 198;
Federhofer 1971-1972, p. 96), it is possible that Haydn too thought of
species counterpoint via chords and inversions, although the manuals that
Haydn drew up for his counterpoint students are condensations of Fux’s
Gradus (Mann 1973) and are silent on this issue.

Albrechtsberger’s Composition Method

By the end of the eighteenth century Johann Georg Albrechtsberger (1736—
1809) had earned the plaudits of Haydn (“the best teacher of composition
among all present-day Viennese masters”) and Mozart (who considered
him the standard by which other organists were to be judged) and counted
the young Beethoven among his pupils (in 1794-1795). In 1793 he as-
sumed the post of Capellmeister at St. Stephen’s in Vienna, the post that
Fux had held more than half a century earlier. Much like Fux, he published
just one major work, his Griindliche Anweisung zur Composition, a com-
prehensive practical treatise (440 pp.) comparable in scope to Fux’s
Gradus.*

Like Fux’s classic text, Albrechtsberger’s work is clearly the product of
a teacher with long practical experience (Fux was 65, Albrechtsberger 59).
It is decidedly nonspeculative, eschewing even the mathematical explana-
tions of intervals that open Gradus. After a brief resume of intervals (which
Albrechtsberger implies on p. 1 that the reader should already know from
studying thoroughbass), chords, and rules of voice leading, the bulk of the
book deals with species counterpoint in 2-4 parts (pp. 19-160) and
imitation and fugue (pp. 161-362). The remainder of the treatise, like the
end of Gradus, covers various topics: rules for five-part writing, different
styles, and an extraordinarily extensive list of instruments (including even
the glass harmonica, invented by “D. Franklin”).

Also like Fux’s Gradus, the Griindliche Anweisung is a decidedly con-
servative work for its time. Although he was well aware of the newer
styles of his time, Albrechtsberger, like Fux and Martini, believed that the
path to learning these newer styles lay in mastering the strict style. Like

4.As discussed in Appendix 2, there are reasons to question whether thoroughbass

manuals appearing under Albrechtsberger’s name beginning in the 1790s are actually by
him.

Harmonic Perspectives on Counterpoint

187


=== PAGE 198 ===

(BG le oe tee let tet 1

188

Example 7-7. Albrechtsberger 1790, p. 24

Fux, he maintained the use of six-syllable solmization with mutation of
hexachords (substituting do for the traditional ut; p. 1). He even calls flats
and sharps “fa-tones” and “mi-tones” (Fa-Téne and Mi-Téne, p. 18). But
the passage of over six decades between Gradus and the Griindliche
Anweisung led to many changes of focus. The church modes of Fux’s
species counterpoint are replaced by cantus firmi in major and minor keys.
And there is a decidedly harmonic focus to the Griindliche Anweisung.$

This harmonic focus is apparent right from page 1 via the explanation
of chords as well as the invocation of thoroughbass knowledge. Whereas
Fux had taught two-part species counterpoint as intervals between voices,
Albrechtsberger assumes that intervals are always part of proper chords
and assumes that readers understand chords and inversions just as they
understand the basics of thoroughbass. On pp. 4—5, for instance, discuss-
ing whether the fourth is consonant or dissonant, he says “some teachers
count the perfect fourth, accompanied by the minor or major sixth and
perfect octave, among the consonances, because it arises from the second
inversion of a perfect chord . . . You can call it as you wish! In my ears
it always remains a dissonance. There is more than one reason to maintain
this.” On p. 120, he explains that a 6/4/3 chord is “the second inversion
of the essential seventh.” These passages, like innumerable others through-
out the work, show Albrechtsberger’s practical attitude. He assumes
knowledge of inversions without explaining it because his purpose is not
to engage in polemic but to teach counterpoint and composition. Likewise
he understands the reasons that some theorists deem 6/4 chords consonant,
but he will not join the heated polemic over this issue, noting that he has
reasons for his opinion, but does not care to state them.

Also included in the introductory chapters are explanations of the régle
de l’octave and the use of its chords (a discussion based largely on rules
for unfigured basses), enharmonic modulations (even from G-minor to Db-
major!), and the like.

Albrechtsberger’s harmonic perspective also affects his explanation of
how to write a two-part counterpoint in first species. He offers a cantus
firmus and explains its structure (see Example 7-7):

5. Benary [1961], p. 130, and Dahlhaus 1989, pp. 66-67, also discuss the harmonic
underpinnings of Albrechtsberger’s approach to counterpoint.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 199 ===

spedie pe per pegpn

good mi also good mi not good. because two perfect
chords follow one another

ne
ee S|

fa fa fa

Example 7-8. Nottebohm 1873, p. 47

The first and last notes stand properly in the C chord if they are accompanied.
The second and third are derived from G major, the fourth and fifth are
again from C major; the sixth and seventh belong to the A-minor chord. The
eighth and ninth taken together belong to E minor. The tenth derives from
A minor; the eleventh from D minor, or both taken together from F major.
The twelfth can be regarded as the octave of G major, or as the fifth of the
C-major chord. The thirteenth can be taken as the tonic or for the third of
A minor or for the sixth above E if the counterpoint is below. The fourteenth
must be considered as the upper fifth of G major; that G ought to appear in
the penultimate measure in compositions of three and more voices. In two-
part writing, only B is added to it; for in the fifth species a due our two
cadences are 6 8 and b3 1—only half cadences [cadences that are lacking
some essential parts]. Now the following chords can be placed over and
under this chorale. (p. 25)

This detailed discussion of harmonic possibilities suggests that Albrechts-
berger, like Mozart, had similar attitudes toward species counterpoint,
although only a single remark about a problematic sixth remains to illu-
minate Mozart’s thinking.

In addition to this explanation, Albrechtsberger’s harmonic approach
to species counterpoint is confirmed by other evidence. For instance, there
are various annotations that Albrechtsberger made on counterpoint exer-
cises the young Beethoven completed for him, such as the one shown in
Example 7-8. In another passage in the Anweisung, Albrechtsberger ex-
plains a D-B verticality as an inverted G-major triad, even though no G
is present (p. 32). And finally, he discusses harmonic rhythm in third
species counterpoint in two voices: “The best two-, three- and multi-voiced
counterpoints in this species are those in which each measure has only a
single chord; because it is more manly and serious . . . In any case, it is
not prohibited to have a different chord on each beat provided that the
first chord and the last are perfect [consonant]” (p. 53).

In sum, like Martini and Mozart, Albrechtsberger knew that composi-
tional craft was strengthened by work in counterpoint. But all three of
these musicians saw no conflict between such appreciation of the linear
aspects of musical structure and harmonic thinking.

Harmonic Perspectives on Counterpoint

189


=== PAGE 200 ===

190

Harmonic Theory and Linearity

The complementarity of harmonic foundations and linear counterpoint is
evident in writings from numerous other quarters during the latter half of
the eighteenth century. For instance, Johann Philipp Kirnberger (1721—
1783), whose harmonic theories are discussed in Chapter 9, explains
simple counterpoint as follows: “complete harmony is in four parts...
Therefore it is impossible to judge with certainty what must be omitted
from the harmony in the various situations that arise [in fewer parts] until
one has a thorough knowledge of four-part composition. Consequently,
this [simple] counterpoint should be considered as a succession of complete
chords” (Kirnberger 1771-1779, Vol. 1, p. 142; Beach-Thym 1982,
p. 159). With this argument, Kirnberger was merely continuing the long-
standing practice of deriving a contrapuntal texture from an implied full-
voiced texture, as Rameau had stated was always the case, as Niedt and
other thoroughbass writers had practiced much earlier in the century in
teaching composition from thoroughbass, and as Lippius had suggested
should be practiced as a composition method as early as the first decade
of the seventeenth century.®

It is clear that figures as diverse as Albrechtsberger, Kirnberger, Martini,
Mozart, Rameau, and Vallotti all agree that counterpoint, stressing the
linear relationships between voices, is based on chordal harmony. But this
does not deny that counterpoint methods also taught aspects of musical
structure not covered by harmonic theory per se. The issues that Mattheson
discusses in 1739—melodic contour, melodic rhythm, melodic motives and
their manipulation, and the creation of an interesting texture via the
interaction of multiple melodies and their contours, rhythms, and mo-
tives—are the issues that come to the fore in Martini’s analisi of music in
the stile antico as well as in Albrechtsberger’s commentaries on music in
more recent styles. These are also the issues that come to the fore in
Martini’s corrections of a piece that the fourteen-year-old W. A. Mozart
wrote as his admission test to the Bologna Accademia dei Filarmonici
(discussed in Mann 1987, pp. 49-51, 55-56). And they are the issues that
come to the fore in Albrechtsberger’s emendations of exercises that Bee-

6. David Beach therefore errs when he explains that “during the latter half of the
eighteenth century, counterpoint instruction normally meant the study of species counter-
point as codified by Johann Fux in his Gradus ad parnassum. This approach, which begins
with two-part writing, is primarily linear in conception. The vertical dimension is controlled
exclusively by intervallic considerations. Thus in recommending that the study of counter-
point begin with four parts to accommodate harmonic considerations, Kirnberger was going
against the prevailing practice of treating harmony and counterpoint as separate disciplines”
(Beach and Thym 1982, p. xvii).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 201 ===

thoven wrote when he studied with him in the early 1790s (discussed in
Mann 1965b, pp. 213-220).

These are also the issues that come to the fore in eighteenth-century
fugal studies in Fux’s Gradus (1725), in Marpurg’s Abhandlung von der
Fuge (1753-1754), and in Albrechtsberger’s Anweisung (1790). Much of
fugal theory during the eighteenth century deals with mechanics—the
structure of a proper fugal subject, working out an appropriate fugal
answer, writing a countersubject, and various fugal devices such as stretto,
inversion, and double or invertible counterpoint. During the century, fugal
theory changed its focus from modal, nonchordal explanations of many
of these features in Fux’s presentation, to tonal and chordal explanations
by Rameau (1722, 3, Chapter 44) and Marpurg. This change from a
modal-nonchordal to a tonal-chordal perspective is surveyed in Horsley
1966 (especially Chapter 4) and Mann 1965b (Part 1, Chapters 3—4).

Because these aspects of fugal structure involve so many details, they
occupy much space in the fugal treatises of the time. But they should not
be confused with the underlying purpose of studying fugue—to learn to
control texture in any style. Thus fugal theory raises many of the same
issues as Mattheson’s discussions of melody. These features of contrapun-
tal theory are relevant to every eighteenth-century musical style. Fux and
Martini composed some of their works in the stile antico, while Mattheson
spoke vehemently against “contrapuntists” and wrote exclusively in the
galant style. Yet all three theorists discuss in their own terms various
techniques of motivic development, imitation, and rhythmic activation of
individual voices and of texture as a whole. As a result, Haydn could have
learned about the techniques of textural and motivic activation that so
characterize his music from his study of either Fux’s Gradus or Matthe-
son’s vollkommene Capellmeister.

Basically, these motivic and contrapuntal techniques are conceptually
independent of any approach to the harmonic dimension, whether inter-
vallic counterpoint, chordal counterpoint, thoroughbass, or Rameauian
harmony. Therefore discussions of line, of motives, or of the interactions
among voices in a polyphonic texture can and do appear in works inde-
pendent of Rameauian influence (such as those by Fux and Mattheson) as
well as works fully adopting Rameau’s harmonic theories (such as that by
Martini). As a result, the dichotomy that some twentieth-century scholars
propose in order to separate eighteenth-century harmonic theory from
linear aspects of tonal music is mostly irrelevant to the eighteenth century.
By and large, after the middle of the century, almost all theorists explicitly
used at least some portions of Rameauian harmonic theory. But this did
not prevent them from discussing in a meaningful manner many of the
linear aspects of the music of their time.

Harmonic Perspectives on Counterpoint

191


=== PAGE 202 ===

192

This is not to say that in the hands of imperceptive musicians, the
adoption of a harmonic approach to counterpoint did not result in ab-
surdities. One example is the brief Traité du Contrepoint par P. Signoretti
dédié a Mrs. les amateurs (Rennes, 1777), a work that seems to have had
a rather limited circulation (the examples are entered by hand on printed
staffs, as in the author’s violin method, published in The Hague, 1777).
Signoretti presents a unique mixture of Fuxian species and Rameau’s
notions of triads, seventh chords, and inversions, treating all chordal
inversions as equivalent, and even beginning three-part exercises in first
species with 6/4 chords. But in the hands of the masters discussed earlier
in this chapter, formulating traditional counterpoint on a chordal basis
allowed them to treat simultaneously both harmonic direction and linear
continuity as complementary aspects of musical structure.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 203 ===

CHAPTER EIGHT

CE 6 SP

Changing Aspects
of Harmonic Theory

In working out a composition, one must always keep in mind the har-
monic triad, because not only all the rules of harmony but also the
invention of melody itself must in part be referred to it, and in part flow
from it... The harmonic triad . . . is therefore like the soul of the
entire composition; it must be investigated intensively and taken into
consideration most painstakingly.

Scheibe 1773, p. 81

THE PREVIOUS CHAPTER shows how even those areas of music theory
most concerned with linearity were strongly influenced by harmonic think-
ing after the middle of the eighteenth century. This and the next chapter
survey various facets of harmonic theory itself during that period.

Novel Approaches to Chord Generation

While many theorists did not bother justifying the origins of intervals and
chords, and those who did generally borrowed one or another of Rameau’s
explanations, others continued to propose new derivations based on math-
ematics or acoustical phenomena. Two such musicians are Sorge and
Tartini.

SORGE
Georg Andreas Sorge (1703-1778), a prolific theorist in Lobenstein, pub-
lished treatises on harmony, thoroughbass, composition, tuning, and organ
construction and left other writings in manuscript. His three works on
harmonic theory and composition are the Vorgemach der musicalischen
Composition, oder . . . Anweisung zum General-Bass (Sorge [1745-


=== PAGE 204 ===

194

1747]), the Compendium harmonicum, oder... Lehre von der Harmonie
(Sorge [1760]), and the Anleitung zur Fantasie (Sorge [1767]).

Like Rameau, some of whose ideas he knew but whose works he ap-
parently never read, Sorge sought mathematical and scientific bases for
chords and intervals, changing his ideas from one work to another. But
whereas Rameau was inspired by a search for Cartesian first principles
and by scientific discoveries, Sorge also reflects the theism of his German
predecessors such as Andreas Werckmeister (1645-1706) and contempor-
aries such as Christoph Gottlieb Schréter (1699-1782). Sorge first derives
intervals and chords from string divisions but differs from many others
by invoking the ratio 1:7 as the origin of the minor seventh (Sorge [1745—
1747], Vol. 3, Chapter 4). This exemplifies for him how music reflects
God: the chord seventh must resolve because false intervals like 1:7 rep-
resent depravity in need of redemption (ibid., Chapter 22). Such arguments
were not deterred by scientific discoveries. Writing around the same time
as Sorge, Schréter recognizes the presence of the triad in instrumental
resonance, explaining that we respond to the triad because God implanted
it both there and in the human soul to represent the Trinity (Schréter
1772, probably completed by 1754, pp. 7—8).

In the Compendium, Sorge changed his model from string divisions to
harmonic resonance. He was aware of resonance in his earlier work but
did not use it in interval or chord generation. He now finds all intervals
and chords among the first thirty-two partials of a natural horn (Chapter
1). An unfortunate implication of this approach is that the fundamental
tone is the basis of each interval and chord located among its upper
partials. Although Sorge did not draw this conclusion, the French theorist
Balliére de Laisement (1729-1800), working independently of Sorge, did.
He argued, for instance, that since a D-F-A chord arises between the
partials 27, 33, and 39 over C, C is therefore the root (base) of the chord
(C...D-F-A as 3:27:33:39; Laisement 1764, p. 100)! Other than Jamard
1769, no writers followed Balliére’s approach to locating chordal roots.
In other matters, Balliére generally follows Rameau or D’Alembert.

In his Anleitung zur Fantasie, Sorge again changed his mind, using the
harmonic series primarily to justify the major triad and deriving some
other chords by joining major triads. An A-minor triad, for instance, arises
from two joined major triads on F and C: f-A-C-E-g. Elsewhere in this
work, though, he uses multiples of the seventh and ninth partials to derive
various chords.

Sorge is important not so much for these speculative ideas but for his
own formulations of various slogans associated with Rameau’s ideas. He
apparently did not read French (according to Marpurg 1759-1763 10,
p. 79) and claimed ignorance of any work based on Rameau prior to
Marpurg’s 1757 translation of D’Alembert’s Elemens (Sorge [1760], Chap-

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 205 ===

ter 12, pars. 3-4; Sorge [1745-1747], 3, Chapter 23, fn. to par. 24). But
he asserts that harmony is the generator of music, that triads and seventh
chords are the basis of all harmonies, and that the seventh is the source
of dissonance. He construes each tenet differently than Rameau had done.
Concerning harmony as the source of melody, he adds the qualification
that melody is what makes each piece distinctive (Sorge [1745-1747], 2,
Chapter 2).

Concerning triads, Rameau recognizes two types of triads (major and
minor) and calls the triad the source of consonant harmony. Sorge counts
five types, adding diminished, augmented, and “defective” (manca for B-
Di-F)—inversions of the defective triad are his source for augmented sixth
chords (Sorge [1745-1747], 1, Chapters 6—10). Thus for him the triad is
not a source of consonant harmony.

Sorge’s expanded number of basic types of triads and his use of com-
binations of triads to explain dissonances were adopted by theorists seek-
ing to list chord types as in thoroughbass, though using the language of
harmonic theory. Johann Adolph Scheibe (1708-1776), for instance, adds
triads such as C-Eb-G# to Sorge’s five types, thereby deriving all sorts of
consonant and dissonant chords (Scheibe 1773, Chapter 2, and p. 363,
where Scheibe states that a dozen major and minor triads stacked one
upon the other produce all possible intervals).1 Others ridiculed Sorge’s
five types of triads. Citing Sorge’s description of major and minor triads
as male and female, Friedrich Wilhelm Marpurg (1718-1795) wonders
whether the three other types might be labeled “castrati and hermaphro-
dites” (Marpurg 1759-1763, pp. 74-75):

Concerning seventh chords as the source of dissonant harmony, Rameau
made this claim based on chordal inversions and chords by subposition.
Sorge learned the slogan “seventh as the source of dissonant harmony”
from Mattheson’s critique of this notion (Sorge [1760], Chapter 12, pars.
3-4) and formulated it idiosyncratically. Alongside Rameau’s seventh
chords, Sorge adds a variety of dissonant suspensions arranged so that
they produce a seventh over the bass. For instance, a 7—6 suspension is
fundamental because of the seventh over the bass—Sorge then inverts this
pattern as if it were a fundamental chord (ibid., 3, Chapter 16)—once
again, Sorge reveals thoroughbass thinking in the language of harmonic
theory. He contradicts these harmonic derivations elsewhere, explaining
seventh chords and augmented sixth chords as phenomena arising from
passing motions (ibid., 3, Chapter 7, par. 13-16 and 18-20).

1. Around the same time, Friedrich Wilhelm Riedt (1710-1783) announced his intention
to calculate the total number of possible chords, listing 27 different types of triads and 108
types of seventh chords, including absurdities like a triad with triply diminished fifth and
doubly diminished third (B#-Db-F>) (Riedt 1756).

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

195


=== PAGE 206 ===

196

More important in the long run than Sorge’s adaptations of Rameauian
slogans is his establishment of three categories of chords: basic chords
(Stammaccorde), inversions (abstammende Accorde), and mixed (ver-
mischte) chords requiring resolution (Sorge [1767], pp. 32-33). The last
category includes what we would call chords with suspensions. This an-
ticipates a similar categorization of harmonies appearing just four years
later in the Kunst des reinen Satzes of Johann Philipp Kirnberger (1721—
1783). But like many of Sorge’s discussions, his presentation lacks the
clarity of Kirnberger’s. Kirnberger makes this differentiation the starting
point of his discussion of harmony, while Sorge buries his categorization
amid other material. Immediately before this classification, Sorge differ-
entiates chords into nine categories: major, minor, anomalous (other),
tonic, dominant, other functions, root-position, inverted, and mixed
(pp. 31-32). Sorge also anticipates another tenet often credited to Kirn-
berger, distinguishing among different types of 6/4 chords. But because
Sorge uses 6/4 chords rather freely as consonant chords in many examples,
this distinction too loses the power and clarity it has for Kirnberger.

Sorge’s ideas influenced several writers, including Georg Simon Lohlein
(1725-1781), author of a popular Clavier-Schule in print from 1765
through 1848. In his first edition, Lohlein extols Sorge’s system “because
it appears to be the most natural” (preface), referring readers desiring
more information to both Sorge’s Compendium and Marpurg’s Handbuch.
Léhlein soon realized that these authors were hostile to one another and
replaced Sorge’s name with Rameau’s in this citation without altering any
of the contents. Sorge’s harmonic ideas are also apparent in a brief, not
terribly well written English thoroughbass manual published around 1760
by John Jasper Heck (c. 1740-1791), who was probably the translator of
Fux 1725, Mattheson 1735, and Quantz 1752 into English (Kassler 1980).

Sorge, influential in his own right, gains added historical significance
through an extended theoretical battle with Marpurg around 1760 (un-
raveled in Bernard 1989). The polemic forms a part of Marpurg’s extensive
campaign to promote in Germany what he believed were Rameau’s the-
ories. Marpurg’s theories as a reflection of Rameau’s ideas are discussed
in Chapter 9; the present discussion covers Marpurg’s interaction with
Sorge.

Marpurg, who inspired polemical writing much as Mattheson had done
earlier in the century, was disturbed by the free interpretation of Ra-
meauian ideas in Sorge’s Vorgemach. He encouraged Sorge to write his
1760 Compendium, urging Sorge to use the opportunity to express his
displeasure over ideas in Marpurg’s 1757 translation of D’Alembert’s
Elemens. Shortly after Sorge’s Compendium appeared, Marpurg published
his own highly critical, annotated edition (Marpurg 1760). Copying
Mattheson, who dedicated his 1717 critique of Buttstett to a “jury” of

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 207 ===

thirteen prominent musicians and published their replies, Marpurg dedi-
cated his critique to fifty-two “famous German composers,” including W.
F, and C. P. E. Bach, both Bendas, Graun, Kirnberger, Mattheson, L.
Mozart, Quantz, Riepel, and Scheibe, and published some replies and
additional polemic in 1761 (Marpurg 1754-1778 §:110 [labeled 1o0]—
20, 131-220, 263-284). He also discussed Sorge’s theories in a separate
extensive discussion (Marpurg 1759-1763, Nos. 8, 10, 18).

The dispute generated unusual animosity on both sides, including the
usual nationalistic and religious barbs, such as Marpurg’s comment that
a particular resolution “is not recognized in Germany; it can be used only
in countries where reindeer or rhinoceros live” (Marpurg 1760, p. 150)
and Sorge’s reference to ‘Mr. Marpourg’ (Sorge [1767], dedication). Sorge
likens Marpurg to the devil (Sorge [1767], p. 56), while Marpurg includes
a mock prayer punning on the German word Sorge (care, sorrow): “Ora
pro Sorgio nostro, Sancta Caecilia!” (“Pray for our Sorge/sorrow, Sancta
Caecilia!”). When Sorge realized that the recently deceased Mattheson,
whose writings Sorge had cited frequently in the Vorgemach, sided with
some of Marpurg’s positions, Sorge damned him too: “Now [Mattheson]
awaits his own Judge. He ill-considered the adage ‘Do not damn others,
lest thou be damned thyself. Do not judge others, lest thou be judged
thyself.” May GOd bless him!” (Sorge [1767], p. 76). More heat than
light, perhaps, but more entertaining reading than more sober disputes.

Sorge and Marpurg clashed over speculative issues (including the num-
ber of basic chord-types, whether to derive only the triad or all chords
from harmonic partials, and the utility of subposed chords) and practical
ones (including Sorge’s free use of 6/4 chords in many examples). As in
all of Marpurg’s disputes, Rameau’s name frequently enters, often asso-
ciated with ideas that were Marpurg’s but not Rameau’s. Sorge, who had
not read Rameau’s works, believed that Marpurg’s 1757 translation of
D’Alembert’s Elemens and Marpurg’s Handbuch bey dem Generalbass
represented Rameau’s thinking. Marpurg said nothing to dispel this
impression. And Sorge came to despise every idea associated (however
erroneously) with Rameau.

TARTINI

Another speculative approach to chord derivation was proposed by the
Italian violinist, composer, and theorist Giuseppe Tartini (1692-1770). In
addition to works on violin playing and ornamentation, he wrote several
speculative and practical theoretical treatises, many of which remained in
manuscript.? Like Rameau, Tartini sought to give his theories a scientific

2. Capri 1945 contains a complete bibliography of his writings. The best critique of
Tartini’s theories in English is Planchart 1960; additional information appears in Krehbiel
1964.

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

197


=== PAGE 208 ===

198

4) SSS |

Example 8-1. Tartini 1754, p. 14

and methodological aura. He drew on his violinistic experience with the
acoustic phenomenon of combination tones to build a harmonic system.
A third sound (terzo souno), as Tartini called it, is heard when two tones
are played sufficiently loud. Although it is hard to believe they were
unknown to string players, since they are a reliable means of checking
intonation, combination tones were not mentioned in print prior to Sorge
1745 and an apparently independent report to the Royal Academy of
Sciences in Paris published in 1752 by Jean-Baptiste Romieu (1723-1766)
(Cohen 1981, pp. 91-92).

Tartini heard what are now called first-order difference tones: the result
of subtracting the frequency of the lower pitch of an interval from that of
the upper pitch. The first chapter of his principal treatise, the Trattato di
musica secondo la vera scienza dell’ armonia (1754), treats this “Harmonic
Phenomenon, Its Nature and Significance.” Although Tartini’s system was
viewed by some as comparable in standing to that of Rameau as a path
to understanding the origin and use of musical elements, its coherence is
marred by Tartini’s mistaken perception of the combination tone of many
intervals, his assertion of two roots for many chords, and numerous
mathematical errors.

Example 8-1 is Tartini’s illustration of the third sounds he heard for
some consonances. (He believed that unisons and multiple octaves had no
third sounds and that the third sound of the perfect fifth was the lower
note of the interval.) The third sounds for the first three intervals are an
octave too high, which does not alter the root of the interval. The error
for the minor sixth is more serious: the third sound is D, not G.

Tartini believed that chord roots should be determined by combination
tones. In progressions of root-position major triads voiced so as to avoid
minor sixths, the third sounds of all the intervals do indeed give plausible
harmonic roots, as is shown in Example 8-2. But when minor triads are
present, multiple “roots” arise, as in Example 8-3.

His problems with dominant-seventh chords are more serious. If the
upper third of the chord is a pure minor third (6:5), its third sound is a
minor third above the chord root, clashing with the leading tone. To
prevent this, Tartini asserts that the top third is actually 7:6, making the
third sound the root of the chord. Unfortunately, for this to be so, scale-
step 4 would have to change pitch significantly if sustained from a pre-
ceding chord.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 209 ===

third sound

Example 8-2. Tartini 1754, p. 68

Tartini also derives various musical phenomena by drawing analogies
with properties of a circle, not always correctly explained (Chapter 2).
These arguments, like other eighteenth-century attempts to argue from
extramusical premises to musical elements and practice, are properly as-
sessed in a 1771 commentary on Tartini’s theories by Benjamin Stillingfleet
(1702-1771):

The circle has bewitched many a sober man .. . I have no doubt but if Tartini
had been as well acquainted with the hyperbola as with the circle, and had
the hyperbola been as easy to draw, he would have fought for his system
rather there . . . But I must observe, that coincidences are often merely
accidental; and therefore are no proof that we have found the true explication
of any thing. (Stillingfleet 1771, p. 19)

Stillingfleet’s critique of Tartini’s theories was inspired by an apparently
similar critique of Rameau’s Démonstration by Robert Price (?-1761),
now lost. Such documents demonstrate the interest in music theory of
scientifically oriented musical amateurs. They were convinced that by the
diligent application of reason they could master complex disciplines and
compensate for the fact that “artists who are most accomplished in their

— 3,2 _——
a) third sounds: from:

zoe

4

b)

ES

ae

be

Example 8-3. Tartini 1754, p. 67. (a) Tartini’s third sounds; (b) the actual third
sounds

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

199


=== PAGE 210 ===

200

art are ill-suited or little disposed to give the public a true theory” (Serre
1753, Avertissement). However well such theorists may point out faults
in the works of musicians, their frequently absurd solutions reveal their
lack of professional-level musical experience, whether they are philosophes
like Diderot and D’Alembert, a mathematician like Euler, or a painter and
scientist like the Swiss theorist Jean-Adam Serre (1704-1788).

Serre published critiques of D’Alembert, Euler, Geminiani, Rameau,
Tartini, and others in 1753 and 1763, also proposing an “absolutely
fundamental” bass (basse essentiellement fondamental) drawn from har-
monic resonance.? Serre’s method yields multiple roots for many chords,
often including notes absent from the chords themselves. He posits F and
C as roots of an A-minor seventh chord. And for the progression “ii’-V’”
in C major, he posits F and G as double roots for both chords, implying
that there is no harmonic progression! Regardless of our contemporary
opinions about such absurdities in these works by musical amateurs,
eighteenth-century musician-theorists took them quite seriously. Much as
Rameau felt it important to defend his theories against Euler and D’Alem-
bert, Tartini responded to Serre in 1767.

Harmonic Reformulations of Thoroughbass

An indication of the extent to which harmonic theories took a central
position even in the absence of a direct influence from Rameau’s works is
the recasting of thoroughbass practice into Rameauian harmonic terms by
the German lutenist, composer, and theorist Johann Friedrich Daube (c.
1730-1797).4 Daube denied having known Rameau’s works before he
wrote his “Thoroughbass in Three Chords” (1756), based on the tonic
chord (Grundtonaccord) or triad on scale-step 1, the fourth chord (4ten
Accord) or added-sixth chord on scale-step 4, and the fifth chord (sten
Accord) or seventh chord on scale-step 5. According to Daube, all the
harmonies in music arise from these three chords, their inversions (Um-
wendungen), anticipations and suspensions of notes of these chords, or
imitation of these chords.

On numerous other matters as well, Daube follows Rameau closely.
Scale-step 5 should carry a seventh chord, since with a triad it would be
indistinguishable from scale-step 1 (Chapter 3, par. 5). Seventh chords on
degrees other than 5 are imitations of the fifth chord (Chapter 4, par. 10).
Key changes take place by changing the dissonances in a chord, such as

3. The most complete study of Serre is Jacobi 1958.
4. The most comprehensive discussions of Daube in English are in Snook 1978 and
Wallace 1983.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 211 ===

adding a sixth to turn a tonic chord into a fourth chord in the key of
scale-step 5 (Chapter 5, par. 2). And progressions other than those among
the three primary chords are evaded or passing cadences (cadenze sfuggite
or entweichende, durchgehende, wegfliehende cadences; Chapter 7,
par. 3).

On other matters, however, Daube is independent of Rameau. For
instance, the fourth chord normally progresses directly to the fifth chord—
Daube shows no sign of Rameau’s sensitivity to step progressions and
does not use double emploi. By contrast, Daube proscribes moving from
the fourth chord to the tonic, explaining that when this progression occurs,
the fourth chord is a tonic and the tonic chord its fifth chord (Chapter 3,
par. 9).

Daube’s treatise is first and foremost a practical work, primarily on
thoroughbass. There are numerous examples of all sorts of progressions,
including interactions among the basic chords, changing keys, multiple
resolutions of diminished seventh chords, progressions to be used in im-
provising preludes, and so forth. Much of the material is applicable to
composition, of course, but specific discussions on composition occur
mostly toward the end, such as how to elaborate progressions by arpeg-
giating chords and adding connecting notes, and how to set chords to a
given melody. Yet despite his practical stance, Daube also recommends
that treatises should explore the theoretical foundations of musical prac-
tices and not merely follow those practices (Chapter 5, par. 13).

The extent of Daube’s direct knowledge of Rameau remains uncertain.
Marpurg harshly criticized Daube for plagiarizing and misrepresenting
Rameau’s ideas (Marpurg 1754-1778 2:325—366, 464-477, 542-547).
Daube replied that he had only seen Rameau’s Démonstration for “a
couple of hours” no earlier than the summer of 1754, by which time his
treatise was already in publication (Marpurg 1754-1778 3:69—70). This
could explain the passing reference to Rameau in Daube’s preface, dated
1754, where he commends the accomplishments of various earlier theo-
rists: Mattheson for his rules on melody, Fux for his four rules of voice
leading, and Heinichen, along with Gasparini and Rameau, for discovering
the natural progressions of chords in a key. From this passage, Daube
seems to regard Rameau as a thoroughbass writer, not the progenitor of
a new discipline of harmony.

Most historians believe that Daube did indeed plagiarize Rameau. Bar-
bara Wallace disagrees, arguing that Daube could have come up with the
idea of the added-sixth chord on scale-step 4 from Gasparini 1708, which
frequently uses this chord (Wallace 1983, pp. 14-15). But it is a far cry
from including this ubiquitous harmony to developing a theory with so
many tenets in common with Rameau. Still, plagiarism is not the only

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

201


=== PAGE 212 ===

202

plausible explanation for Daube’s borrowings. It is far more likely that
Rameauian ideas had already entered common musical discourse and
Daube, like many other musicians, was unaware of their source.

Supporting this hypothesis is a 1751 thoroughbass manual by Georg
Joachim Joseph Hahn (c. 1690-after 1769) that anticipates Daube’s ap-
proach. Like Daube, Hahn cites three principal chords (Haupt-Accorden
or Haupt-Klange) on 1, 4, and 5, whose original form or inversion (Ver-
Gnderung or Verwechselung) ordinarily appears over each bass note (for
instance, “the second degree uses an inversion of the fifth of the mode;”
Chapters 7 and 16). Hahn does not announce this harmonic approach as
a novelty, but simply places it alongside traditional thoroughbass material.
Chapters 8 through 15, for instance, treat in order chords with 2, with 3,
with 4 in the signature, and so forth. And Hahn includes one of the last
presentations of the archaic system of “church keys” alongside the twenty-
four major and minor keys (Lester 1989, pp. 77-82). As with Daube, it
is unlikely that Hahn knew his harmonic ideas came from Rameau, since
he freely acknowledges borrowings from thoroughbass treatises by Gas-
parini and Telemann, but does not mention Rameau. Instead, Hahn’s
approach, published when he was around sixty years old, appears to be
like many other comparable works—the result of years of teaching this
material with what seems to us a free mixture of newer and older ap-
proaches. Most likely, Hahn simply understood the three principal chords
in each key as common knowledge, as is also quite possible with Daube.

Daube spent the earlier portion of his life in several German cities. In
1769 he settled in Vienna, where he remained. Shortly after arriving, he
published the contents of his thoroughbass manual in a serialization, then
as the first part of Der musikalische Dilettant (1771), and again in Chapter
1 of the second part, his treatise on composition (1773). The chapter
headings in this composition manual might suggest an approach similar
to Fux’s Gradus: after a first chapter on Harmony in General, Daube
treats Voice Motions, Writing for Two Voices, Writing for Three Voices,
Writing for Four Voices, Writing for Five and More Voices, Variation,
Imitation, Canon, Simple Fugue, Double Counterpoint, and Double Fugue.
But the discussions throughout are based on harmonic progressions. As
Daube explains in the foreword, thoroughbass, by which he means his
own formulation based on the three principal chords,

can properly be called the guide to composition. The reason is this: thorough-
bass consists of knowledge of chords and their succession. Composition, on
the contrary, teaches how these chords are to be combined skilfully with
melody so that expression or the depiction of the affects arises from this
alliance. Furthermore, each melody is composed of tones which are borrowed
intervals from chords.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 213 ===

Se SeSee
SSS Ses Se

Example 8-4. Daube 1773, p. 11

Daube repeatedly discusses the chordal foundation of voice leadings, as
in the illustration of contrary motion shown in Example 8-4. He now calls
the three principal chords in the key the first chord or ruling chord, the
second chord (on scale-step 4), and the third chord (on scale-step 5).

The example begins with the diminished seventh; the resolution takes place
as usual to the first chord [the tonic chord on beat 2]. Then the third chord
[the chord on scale step 5] follows, and once again the first chord. After this
the third chord appears yet again, but its resolution takes place not to the
first chord, but to a chord similar to the first chord, namely the third chord
of D minor [on the last beat of measure 2]. This harmony again proceeds to
a harmony similar to its first chord, namely the compound seventh chord of
G major. The following harmonizing tones have the same resolution as the
first two measures, but a tone lower. (Daube 1773, p. 12)

For Daube, each interval expresses a chord, even on the third beats of
measures 1 and 2, where he cites dominant-seventh chords although the
root and leading tone are absent. He recognizes the downbeat of measure
3, which presents F# and E, as a leading-tone chord from G major that is
nonetheless similar to and can substitute for the expected arrival on a
tonic chord in D.

In two-part writing, Daube distinguishes writing for two upper parts
from writing that represents the bass and a melody. If the lower part is
the bass, he suggests that the composer create a progression from the three
principal chords, first placing the root (Grundton) in the bass and then
elaborating the chords. This is similar to the harmonization method used
by Barbara Ployer when she studied with Mozart a decade later: work out
a fundamental bass of root-position chords, and then compose the actual
bass from the notes in those chords.

Daube expresses in harmonic terms the standard explanation for chang-
ing key by introducing a new leading tone: “the harmony of the foreign
third chord [the chord on the new scale-step 5] must always precede the
appearance of the foreign first chord [the new tonic chord]” (p. 29). He
discusses at length how to choose basic progressions, when to invert

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

203


=== PAGE 214 ===

204

harmonies, how to use chromatic tones that do not imply a change of key,
how to place a cadence at the end of a passage, and so forth. As he
proceeds to more voices, he adds discussions on imitation, on the proper
use of melodic writing versus passage-work (Singbaren versus Brillanten),
on scoring, on dynamics, on fast movements, on slow movements, and so
forth, leading eventually to symphonic scores. In short, he systematically
builds from his three principal chords in thoroughbass up to the compo-
sition of symphonic passages.

Daube published a third volume to the Musikalische Dilettant in 1797,
but quite likely he wrote it in the early 1770s (Snook 1978, pp. 458 and
469). This third part deals mostly with the invention of melody. Since its
subject matter does not so directly concern harmony, Robert Wason in-
terprets the work as representing a retreat from “the radical traits of the
Generalbass in drey Accorden” (Wason 1985, p. 11), part of his argument
that such harmonic thinking was out of line with Viennese publications
of the period. But Daube did not abandon his harmonic thinking—har-
monic thinking pervades Daube’s notion of voice leading and melody. In
addition, the likelihood that Daube completed the Anleitung in the 1770s
along with the Dilettant and, if so, had probably been using it as a teaching
resource for the quarter-century prior to its publication speaks against any
retreat from a harmonic theory that was in any case by no means “radical”
in Vienna at the time, as evidenced by Mozart’s harmonic perspective on
counterpoint and use of fundamental bass to teach harmonization, Al-
brechtsberger’s harmonic approach to counterpoint, and Beethoven’s ci-
tation of subposed chords in ‘teaching materials.

Although Daube’s presentation of melodic construction and of the struc-
ture of phrases and larger musical constructions is not as systematically
organized as the comparable discussions by Heinrich Christoph Koch
(1749-1816) in the 1780s and 17905, his discussions of texture, dynamics,
and scoring are virtually unique in the late eighteenth century and remain
an invaluable resource on galant music.

Chord Inversions and Chordal Functions

In several areas, changes in chordal nomenclature reflect changes in un-
derlying thinking. These include replacing older names for various chords
with numbering of inversions and gradually shifting toward naming all
harmonies in relation to the tonic of the key.

NAMING INVERSIONS

Rameau continued to refer to inverted chords by their traditional tho-
roughbass names (such as 6-chords, “chord of the little sixth” for 6/4/3
chords, and “chord of the large sixth” for 6/5/3 chords), rather than as

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 215 ===

inversions of triads or seventh chords. Starting around the midcentury, the
modern system of numbering inversions became widespread. In Germany,
Sorge, Marpurg, and Léhlein number the chordal Versetzung or Umkeh-
rung (Sorge [1745-1747], 3, Chapter 7; Marpurg 1755-1762 1, p. 363
Lohlein 1765, p. 96). In France, Rameau’s pupil [Pietro] Gianotti (?-1765)
numbers the renversement in his treatise based on Rameau’s manuscript
on fundamental bass (Gianotti 1759). And in Italy, Giuseppe Paolucci
(1726-1776) numbers the rovescio (Paolucci 1765-1772, 1, p. 74).

INTERCHANGEABILITY OF INVERSIONS

For some theorists, even some sophisticated ones, the fact that various
inversions were all based on the same root-position form meant that these
inversions might be relatively interchangeable with one another. For in-
stance, Mozart’s pupil Barbara Ployer seems not to have learned to use
second-inversion chords properly, whatever Mozart’s explanation might
have been. But with the exception of the Signoretti treatise cited at the
end of Chapter 7, no theorist went so far as to open and close examples
without regard to the position of the bass.

Rameau and those who followed him closely (including, for instance,
Kirnberger) regarded chord progressions as imitations of cadences. For
them, using chord positions other than those in a formal cadence required
some sort of rationale (such as desiring to continue motion within a
phrase). Other theorists who simply treated chords as a vocabulary from
which to create progressions allowed a much freer interchange of inver-
sions. This group includes theorists associated with Rameau as well as
theorists independent of him. For instance, Anton Bemetzrieder (1743 or
1748~c. 1817), author of several popular books published in France and
later in England, freely mixes chord positions within phrases in his 1771
keyboard and harmony primer, a work apparently written with some
participation by Bemetzrieder’s patron Denis Diderot.

Sorge also includes many examples in his Compendium in which 6/4
chords are approached and left by skip in the bass.’ One is shown in
Example 8-5, criticized by Marpurg. Marpurg, who recognizes the differ-
ent roles played by the three positions of a triad (Marpurg 1755-1762,
I, p. 35), explains that the bass should not skip in and out of 6/4 chords
as it can with 6/3 chords except amid certain arpeggiation patterns (see
Example §-6).

In accord with the freedom with which he uses 6/4-chords, Sorge argues
that a fourth over the bass is a consonance (Sorge [1745-1747], 2, Part

5. Sorge’s free use of 6/4 chords may result from his belief that a major 6/4 chord is

more consonant than a minor 6/3 chord (Sorge [1745-1747], 2, Chapter 1). Although his
reasoning is the same as Zarlino, Sorge does not cite Zarlino.

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

205


=== PAGE 216 ===

ao
o
Te BO

206

Example 8-5. Marpurg 1760, Fig. 71

2, Chapter 1). Yet he also anticipates Kirnberger’s later distinction between
consonant and dissonant 6/4 chords by suggesting that whereas some 6/4
chords are separate harmonies, 6/4 chords at a cadence yield to 5/3 chords
(ibid., par. 10). But even in the case of the cadential 6/4, Sorge considers
that the tonic, not the dominant, is the basis (ibid., Table 14, Figure 4).
Léhlein’s distinction between 6/4 chords that are passing (in transitu) and
those that resolve to 5/3 (Léhlein 1765, p. 102), also preceding Kirnber-
ger’s published theories, probably derives from this passage of Sorge’s.

CHORDAL FUNCTIONS

Inversional thinking and recognition of root progressions led to a marked
shift in conceptualizing the nature of chord relationships during the later
eighteenth century. Rameau had proposed three chordal functions: tonic,
dominant, and subdominant. They were the pillars of the key and also the
models for all chord progressions. As discussed earlier, these functions
were not quite equivalent to our modern notions of I, IV, and V chords.
For Rameau, any seventh chord (or even any chord that operated like a
seventh chord, such as diminished sevenths and most chords by subposi-

Example 8-6. Marpurg 1760, Figs. 69a, 69e, 69f

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 217 ===

tion) was simply a dominant. He made no further distinctions among what
we would call ii7, iii7, and vi7 in a major key—they were simple dominants
that progressed in imitated cadences, to be distinguished from the domi-
nant-tonic that had a leading tone and was capable of forming a conclusive
cadence. Likewise, any perfect chord (triad) was a tonic, and any chord
that moved up by fifth, especially if it had an added sixth, was a subdom-
inant. Outside of these chordal functions, Rameau did not differentiate
chordal functions within a key or generally specify the location of the
remaining chords in relation to a tonic. This aspect of Rameau’s theories
led him to his notions of implied dissonances (to specify the role of every
nontriad as a dominant or subdominant), implied chromaticism, and even
to the notion of a reigning tonic as opposed to local tonics (any unadorned
triads). Most of his pupils and others who followed his ideas retained
many of these ideas, including Kirnberger, who maintains the term dom-
inant for any seventh chord (1771-1779, 1, p. 64; Beach-Thym 1982,
p. 83).

Rameau’s approach postulates a one-to-one relationship between chor-
dal structure and chordal function. A triad is a tonic, no matter how
temporary; a seventh chord is a dominant. Modern harmonic theories
generally separate chordal structure from chordal function. Triads and
seventh chords are chord-types that can occur on many different scale
steps, and chordal functions are measured both by the position of the root
in relation to the tonic of the key, and by the nature of the progression.
The change from Rameau’s conception to our modern notion began to
appear in print beginning in the 1750s and 1760s. Jean Laurent de Béthizy
(1709-1781), for instance, argues that perfect chords that are not preceded
by progressions that would make them true tonics were only “implied
tonics” (censée-toniques; Béthizy 1754, p. 153). This removes the neces-
sity of considering all chords as tonics (triads), dominants (seventh chords),
or subdominants (with added sixths), thereby loosening the identity that
Rameau had postulated between chord structure and chord function.

Other theorists created a terminology that led toward placing chords
on scale degrees rather than arguing that a specific chord-type implied a
given scale degree. Sorge, for instance, names chords according to their
scale degree; a Sextharmonie refers to a chord on scale-step 6, as opposed
to Sextaccorde, which he retains as the traditional term for a 6/3 chord
(Sorge 1760, Chapter 12, par. 20).

A further step toward positioning all chords in terms of the tonic was
taken by the Irish theorist John Trydell (c. 1715-1776), who bases his
Two Essays on the Theory and Practice of Music (Dublin, 1766) on
Rameau’s theories, probably via an English writer such as Lampe. Over

6. The only substantial study of Béthizy’s theories is Earhart 1985.

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

207


=== PAGE 218 ===

208

9
i
Oll x
|
ie]

[K = keynote}

Example 8-7. Trydell 1766, p. 46

half a century before Gottfried Weber (1779-1839) began using Roman
numerals systematically to label chords, and a decade before Abbé Vogler
(1749-1814) used Roman numerals to label some cadences and seventh
chords (Vogler 1776, p. 82; Vogler [1778], Table xxi, Fig. 5), Trydell
introduces what he calls “harmonical figures” over chord progressions,
calling them “an obvious Invention” (Dedication, p. xi) (see Example 8-
7). In later examples, Trydell uses these “harmonical Figures” to compare
progressions with different bass lines (p. 49). Many examples containing
these figures also label all the intervals over the bass part, just as in Fux’s
counterpoint exercises.

Because of its appearance in such a remote geographical location in a
work intended to encourage Irish composers, Trydell’s notation would be
a historical oddity of little larger significance but for the fact that his entire
book was adopted as the article Music in the first Encyclopaedia Britannica
(Edinburgh, 1771). Although this venture was quite a bit more amateurish
than its momentous French model,’ the work circulated widely and may
well have suggested the use of chord numbers to continental readers.

Trydell’s chord numbering is altogether separate from Kirnberger’s sug-
gestion to replace thoroughbass notation with chord root-names (article
Bezifferung in Sulzer 1771-1774). Kirnberger’s suggestion is in fact re-
markably similar to Rameau’s proposals of 1732 to replace thoroughbass
notation with a tablature including chord roots in letters. John Holden
(?-c. 1771), in his 1770 Essay Towards a Rational System of Music, writes
the pitch names of chord roots below the score (p. 102).

A further step away from Rameauian ideas and toward nineteenth-
century harmonic theory appears in the early works of Abbé Vogler. Many
of the most striking ideas of this eccentric theorist, composer, and pioneer-
ing ethnomusicologist do not appear in print until the early years of the
nineteenth century and therefore fall outside the present study.* But even
his earlier works, Tonwissenschaft and Tonsezkunst (1776), which reap-

7. The editors’ apologies for delays (in the preface to the third volume) are ample

explanation of the nature of this venture.
8. The only comprehensive study of Vogler in English is Grave 1987.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 219 ===

pears as the first part of his Kubrpfalzische Tonschule ([1778]), sanctioned
as the official composition text for The Palatinate, contain a number of
important innovations. Vogler studied briefly with Padre Martini and knew
the works of Rameau, Tartini, Kirnberger, Vallotti, and other theorists of
the age. He adopts many of the tenets of Rameau and his followers,
including the three basic chords in a key, cadences as chord progressions
in themselves and models for other progressions, and the fundamental
bass as a representation of chordal roots. But Vogler was not at all troubled
by the concerns of Rameau and other theorists about the types of chords
appropriate to given scale degrees or the types of progressions allowable
in the fundamental bass. Vogler establishes several types of chords on each
step of the scale, even on the leading tone. This completes the separation
of scale step and chord type, in that any chord type can now appear on
any step within the key.

Chord Tones and Nonharmonic Tones

Nowadays, we use a collective term such as nonharmonic tone or foreign
tone to denote all pitches not belonging to chords, and we categorize the
patterns that such notes form as passing tones, neighbors, suspensions,
anticipations, appoggiaturas, escape tones, and so forth. The foundation
of this distinction was laid during the second half of the eighteenth century.
But no single theorist formulated the concept with a collective term for
all notes not part of triads and seventh chords.

To an early-eighteenth-century musician, the modern distinction be-
tween chord tone and nonharmonic tone was not at all obvious. Earlier
theory viewed intervals in terms of consonances versus dissonances and
suspended dissonances versus passing dissonances—dichotomies not di-
rectly transferable to chord tones vs. nonharmonic tones. Some disso-
nances are nonharmonic tones and can resolve into a stationary harmony.
Other dissonances are chord tones, such as chord sevenths (generally
suspended or passing dissonances) or fourths over the bass in second-
inversion chords (not treated as suspended or passing dissonances), and
therefore resolve only when a harmony changes (though in the case of
passing second-inversion chords, the fourth did not seem to resolve at all).
Some consonances are nonharmonic tones in need of resolution, such as
6—§ over a root-position triad. Some consonances that are chord tones
nevertheless resolve as dissonances, such as the fifth over the bass in a 6/5
chord. And some chord sevenths are suspended dissonances, while other
chord sevenths arise as neighbors or passing tones either on or after the
beat.

Conventions of thoroughbass figuring placed further obstacles in the
way of the modern distinction. First, figuring commonly included only

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

209


=== PAGE 220 ===

210

those dissonances a performer had to play to avoid unfortunate clashes—
mostly suspensions and appoggiaturas. Other notes (passing tones, neigh-
bors, escape tones, anticipations) were “notes of taste” or “suppositions,”
often simply learned by rote as part of patterns (Figuren or Manieren).
Since these tones were not often played by a thoroughbass realizer, they
were not deemed part of the harmony and were largely bypassed by
thoroughbass theorists and harmonic theorists like Rameau. Indeed, for
some theorists the term dissonance signified only conchordal dissonances
included in thoroughbass figurings. Second, each verticality received its
own figuring. There was no easy way to distinguish a dissonance whose
resolution indicated a new harmony from a dissonance that resolved into
the existing harmony, since in both cases the dissonant verticality and the
chord of resolution had separate figurings. For instance, a seventh over G
could resolve to E as a 7—6 suspension within an E-minor chord (in which
case 7/3 resolves to 6/3) or to E in a progression to a C-major chord (in
which case 7/5/3 resolves to 5/3).

Recognizing that there were only two basic types of chords—triads and
seventh chords—was the first step toward the modern differentiation be-
tween chord tones and nonharmonic tones. But even those accepting this
differentiation did not agree on how to understand other notes in terms
of these chords. Some theorists dealt more readily with conchordal dis-
sonances, while others dealt with notes added to already existing chords.

SUSPENSIONS AND APPOGGIATURAS

Rameau’s approach to conchordal dissonances accepts the premise of
thoroughbass that such dissonances are part of the harmony. Via subposed
chords, he explains all conchordal dissonances as parts of seventh chords.
Explaining all conchordal dissonances as parts of chords is directly counter
to the modern position, which treats some conchordal dissonances as
nonharmonic tones.

Although his notion of subposed chords is one of the more problematic
aspects of his theory, it was adopted in some form by many of his French
protégés as well as by Marpurg, who was then the source of subposition
for several German works, including keyboard and thoroughbass methods
by Lohlein in 1765 and Daniel Gottlob Tiirk (1756-1813) in 1791, and
Koch’s composition treatise. As late as the 1810s, Beethoven taught his
composition students Tiirk’s subposed chords as one way of explaining
suspensions (Nottebohm 1872, p. 170).

Each theorist interpreted subposition in his own way. A few, like Ra-
meau, explain that suspended notes have a melodic origin but their reso-
lution is best analyzed via subposition (Roussier 1764, pp. 94-95, 98),
while most are silent on this issue. Some, like Rameau, use subposed
chords only up to the eleventh, while others extend chords up to the

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 221 ===

SSS ee
J} face ——

Example 8-8. Sorge 1767, Table 6, Figs. 3, 4

thirteenth (Béthizy 1754; Marpurg). Some theorists, like Rameau, use
subposition only when it does not create syncopated harmonic rhythm in
the fundamental bass (Béthizy 1754), whereas others are unconcerned by
this (Clement 1758; Marpurg).

Even some theorists who argue against Rameau’s formulation of sub-
position came up with their own notions of chords with more notes than
seventh chords. Francesco Antonio Vallotti (1697-1780), for instance,
calls Rameau’s attempt to explain all dissonances as sevenths via subposed
chords “a mistake of the greatest consequence throwing the doctrine and
use of dissonances into chaos” (Vallotti 1779, p. xxv). Yet Vallotti, in the
third book of his manuscript treatise (probably written around 1770 but
not published until 1950), proposes his own form of chords with up to
seven different notes, each occurring in several inversions, creating virtual
tone clusters. For instance, Vallotti illustrates a triad with a ninth, eleventh,
thirteenth and also a suspended fourteenth (G-B-D-A-C-E-F), along with
all its inversions (Vallotti 1950, Book 3, Chapter 18).°

Subposition was a major issue in Marpurg’s disputes with Sorge in the
1760s as well as those with Kirnberger in the 1770s. Sorge argues that
Marpurg’s subposed chords often place the dissonance in the wrong chord.
In Example 8-8, Sorge argues convincingly that “to introduce this ninth,
D is needed as fifth of the dominant chord G-B-D, not as seventh of the
seventh chord E-G-B-D . .. How absurd would that ninth chord be if the
seventh chord E-G-B-D had to precede it” (Sorge 1767, pp. 54-55). In
general, Sorge argues that “all tied dissonances . . . arise from the mixture
of two chords” (p. 53). Just four years later, Kirnberger picked up on
suggestions in Sorge’s works and presented the modern formulation of
suspended dissonances, differentiating clearly between chordal sevenths

g. Vallotti’s treatise is replete with a variety of absurdities. He repeatedly contradicts
himself, as when he forbids root progressions from scale-step 4 to 5 (Book 2, Chapter 24,
Pp. 273) only four pages after using this progression in a cadence. He often misreads Rameau,
insisting, for instance, that for Rameau only a chord with a major third has a true basso
fondamentale (Vallotti 1779, p. xvi) and that Rameau introduced the term sospensione to
music theory (p. xxv).

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

211


=== PAGE 222 ===

212

that require a change of harmony in order to resolve and suspensions that
resolve in a harmony already present (discussed in Chapter 9).

PASSING DISSONANCES
Whereas suspended nonharmonic tones continued to be thought of in
many ways past the end of the eighteenth century, much of the modern
attitude toward unsuspended nonharmonic tones appeared in Marpurg’s
writings during the 1750s. But terminology prevented a clear distinction
from becoming universal. Traditional terminology differentiated notes ac-
cording to their placement on the beat (Hauptnoten or principal notes) or
after the beat (durchgehende Noten or passing notes), ignoring whether
the pitches are chord tones or nonchord tones, consonant or dissonant.
Such locutions reflect the assumptions of an earlier era when unsuspended
notes on the beat were normally consonant and notes after the beat were
regarded primarily as connections to the next beat. This terminology
endured through the end of the century. For instance, Mozart uses the
term passing notes (durchgehenden Noten) when speaking of unisons on
a weak beat (Mozart 1784, fol. 11). Marpurg sometimes uses this ter-
minology, but also treats notes in terms of their harmonic status.

Marpurg discusses nonharmonic tones in the second volume of his
Handbuch (Marpurg 1755-1762, 2, pp. 81ff.), in the Anleitung zur Musik
iiberhaupt (Marpurg 1763, Chapter 17 on Passagen), and in the Anleitung
zum Clavierspielen (Marpurg 1755, pp. 36-60 on Manierung). His pre-
sentation is basically the same in all three, but with some differences in
terminology.

In the Anleitung zum Clavierspielen, he uses the term subsidiary notes
(Nebennoten), not passing notes, to refer to notes occurring after a beat.
Nebennoten denotes the metric status of a note, not its harmonic status.
If a piece contained only principal notes (Hauptnoten), it would be merely
a succession of mostly consonant whole notes. Therefore, the single prin-
cipal note necessary to the harmony in a given voice is frequently divided
into subsidiary notes. Such embellishments (Manieren) are either composed
into the piece (Setzmanieren) or added by the performer (Spielmanieren).
Subsidiary notes can belong to the harmony as repetitions or arpeggiations
(harmonischer Nebennoten), or can be passing (durchgehende) notes or
changing notes (Wechselnoten). The term changing note to refer to passing
tones on the beat, which remains in modern German, is another relic of
the stile antico. Passing dissonances were viewed as occurring after the
beat. When a passing dissonance occurred on the beat, it was assumed
that the dissonance had changed places with a consonance. (This meaning
of changing note is entirely separate from Fux’s nota cambiata, which
refers to a particular melodic pattern.)

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 223 ===

=e

Example 8-9. Marpurg 1755-1762, 2, Table 3, Fig. 16

In the Anleitung zur Musik tiberhaupt, Marpurg is even more explicit
about the distinction between a note’s metric and harmonic status. But he
confuses the issue by using the term principal note in two separate mean-
ings: “With changing notes it can happen that the last of two notes is at
the same time both a principal [Haupt-] and a passing (durchgehende}
note; the former with respect to the harmony, the latter with respect to
the meter [Tacteintheilung]” (p. 146). Only after a generic term such as
nonharmonic or foreign tone appeared in the nineteenth century would
such infelicitous constructions disappear.

Even with this inadequate terminology, Marpurg does specify the dif-
ference between chord tone and nonharmonic tone and separates this
dichotomy from consonance-dissonance and accented-unaccented. But he
does this only with regard to nonsuspensions. In the Anleitung zur Musik
tiberhaupt, he comes close to including all nonharmonic tones, differen-
tiating those subsidiary tones that arise via diminution (Verkleinerung) or
division of a long note from those that arise via extension of a note
(Haltung or Zusammenziehung; pp. 144-145). All subsidiary tones are,
therefore, either harmonic (harmonische) or melodic (melodische). This is
close to the modern distinction between all nonharmonic tones and all
chord tones. But his insistence on treating suspended notes as subpositions
vitiates this attempt.

In the realm of nonsuspensions, Marpurg’s distinctions allow him to
parse examples and label each note much as a modern theorist would.
This is especially clear in passages containing several nonharmonic tones,
where previous theorists had trouble making these distinctions. Here is
his explanation of why the suspension in Example 8-9 does not resolve to
the first A: “For who is there who knows harmony and cannot see that
in this example the resolution of the seventh is figuratively delayed via the
inversion of the harmony, and that this [resolution] happens not at the
indicated eighth but only on the last half-note A?” (p. 85). Nearly two
decades later, as accomplished a contrapuntist as Padre Martini still had
trouble distinguishing embellished suspensions from true resolutions (in
Example 7-4).

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

213


=== PAGE 224 ===

3
bs

Example 8-10. Marpurg 1755-1762, 2, Table 3, Fig. 24

Marpurg is able to construct a viable substructure even in complex
interactions, such as the passage in Example 8-10 “by a certain good old
harmonist”:1°

How will one explain this? I see no other manner than to represent the
principal notes of the piece as at b; and if one wished to augment this with
nothing but passing notes, it would appear as at c. But instead of executing
this progression with this particular motion, the dots at a are removed, from
which, by a harmonic freedom, this special sequence of harmonies necessarily
arises. (pp. 85-86)

Key Changes and Chromaticism

Although a harmonic perspective affected notions of key changes and
chromaticism, in many ways thinking in these areas remained close to its
formulation in earlier thoroughbass theory. Other than using chordal
terminology to refer to keys, few theorists before Schenker related larger
harmonic and tonal motions to the processes by which they understood
local voice leading and harmonic progression. The occasional remarks in
the works of Joseph Riepel (1709-1782) and Koch that imply such com-
parisons are discussed in Chapters 10 and 11.

Theorists continued to view the function of key changes much as Zarlino
had viewed the use of dissonance—to add variety. Perhaps Marpurg stated
it best when he notes that the “rule of unity” demands one key for a
whole piece, while the “rule of variety” requires the presence of other keys
(Marpurg 1755-1762, p. 24). From this perspective, theorists needed to
explain how separate keys relate to one another and how progressions
can be led from one key to another.

10. The conclusion of this discussion refers to such progressions in the works of J. S.
Bach.

214 Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 225 ===

RELATIONSHIPS AMONG KEYS
Theorists as early as Zarlino explained that regular cadential points occur
on the notes of the perfect chord built on the modal final—on 1, 3, and
5. By the early eighteenth century, theorists recognized that although the
dominant is a common goal of key changes, the mediant, at least in major
keys, does not often play that role. They found various ways of explaining
that the closely related keys are those whose tonic triads exist in the
original key. In a major key, close changes are to 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, while
in a minor key, the goals are 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7.

These are the keys closest to the tonic in circular chord progressions of
rising or descending thirds proposed by Werckmeister: C-e-G-b-D . . . and
C-a-F-d-Bb . . . (Werckmeister 1698, pp. 20-22). They are also the keys
closest to the tonic on Heinichen’s musical circle (Heinichen 1711, p. 261)
and on Mattheson’s “improved” circle of 1735. All these schemes incor-
porate both major and minor keys into a single progression, which Hein-
ichen asserts is an improvement over earlier circular modulatory schemes
by fourths and fifths that pass through only major or minor keys (as in
Penna 1684, 3, Chapters 9-13; and as Heinichen relates that his teacher
Johann Kuhnau [1660-1722] taught; Heinichen 1728, pp. 840-841).
Michael Johann Friedrich Wideburg (1720-1800) illustrated several of
these schemes in a single multitiered circle in the third volume of his
immense (over 1600-page) keyboard method (1765-1775). Reading from
the outside, the tiers show show Heinichen’s and Mattheson’s circle of
keys, circles by fourths and fifths, and the common key signatures of
relative major and minor keys (see Example 8-11). From at least Penna
onward, manuals urged students to practice circular progressions, whether
by playing the single chords one after the other, or playing a brief pro-
gression in each key before moving on to the next. Such exercises were
intended to instill familiarity with all the keys and to serve as models for
improvisation.

More fanciful, but just as indicative of the multiple possibilities of key
relationships, is Riepel’s likening of related keys to the residents of a feudal
estate. In C major, for instance, C is the landowner (Meyer), G is the field
hand (Knecht), A minor the head maid (Obermagd), E minor her assistant
(Untermagd), F major a day laborer (Tagléhner), and D minor a maid
(Unterlaufferin; Riepel 1755, pp. 65ff.).

Various writers later in the century began to include keys related by
major-minor mixture in the orbit of diatonically related keys. Marpurg
explains that “in the galant style a short phrase [Rhytmus] in a major key
may, on its repeat on the same scale step, be transformed into a minor
key, upon which one returns to the major key” (Marpurg 1755-1762, I,
p. 25). Riepel illustrated this around the same time (Riepel 1755, p. 71).

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

215


=== PAGE 226 ===

216

BLOCKED IMAGE AT THE
REQUEST OF THE PUBLISHER

Example 8-11. Wideburg, Der sich selbst informirende Clavierspieler 3, p. 192
(Music Division, The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, Astor,
Lenox and Tilden Foundations)

Sorge goes further by noting that the common interchange of parallel
major and minor keys brings the related keys of C major and A minor
close to the related keys of C minor and Eb major (Sorge 1767, p. 38).

THE PROCESS OF CHANGING KEYS

Many theorists maintained the traditional thoroughbass explanation of
moving to a new key by introducing its leading tone. Some changed the
terminology to urge introducing the new dominant chord. Some followed
Rameau, invoking change in chordal function to explain moving from one
key to another, such as turning a tonic chord into a subdominant or a
dominant to change the key by a fifth (Gianotti 1759, p. 47; Daube 1756,
Chapter 5, par. 2). Finally, there were widespread discussions, many trace-

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 227 ===

able to Rameau’s influence, of enharmonic change of diminished seventh
chords allowing quick changes to distant keys.

Several theorists offer brief examples modulating from a given key to
various closely and more distantly related keys. Among those offering such
listings, which began the genre of Modulationslehren that lasted into the
twentieth century, are Sorge [1753], Soler 1762, Kirnberger 1771-1779,
I, pp. 113ff. (Beach-Thym 1982, pp. 131ff.), Vogler 1778-1781 (which
illustrates modulations to all other keys from each of the twenty-four
keys), and Albrechtsberger 1790, p. 10.

CHROMATICISM WITHIN A KEY
As discussed in Chapter 3, there are solid practical reasons that thorough-
bass theorists explained most chromaticism, no matter how brief, as a
change in the local key. Even musicians of the stature of W. A. Mozart
would cite a key change for a single brief chord (Mozart 1784, Fol. 8°).

Nonetheless, thoroughbass theorists in occasional remarks and har-
monic theorists from Rameau onward suggest that brief instances of chro-
maticism can also be viewed as a temporary digression within the pre-
vailing key. Sorge notes that sharps can occasionally appear without an
actual change to another key (Sorge [1745-1747], 1, Chapter 13, par.
20). Kirnberger and Koch came yet closer to specifying the difference
between such local progressions and an actual change of key (discussed in
Chapters 9 and 11). But as with nonharmonic tones, until terms such as
secondary dominant, applied dominant, borrowed chord, or auxiliary
dominant, became common, most such discussions remained isolated and
did not become universal.

CONTINUOUS CHROMATICISM
Although occasional discussions arise from Rameau onward illustrating
enharmonic changes, especially those involving diminished seventh chords,
Vogler’s 1778 suggestion for a type of constantly modulating chromaticism
is unparalleled in the eighteenth century and was probably quite suggestive
to many nineteenth-century composers. After illustrating numerous in-
creasingly chromatic changes of key (Ausweichungen), he offers the cir-
cular progression in Example 8-12 that some modern theorists refer to as
the omnibus (Wason 1985, pp. 15-19). Vogler recognizes the special
nature of this progression:

It must be noted that these changes of key are based more on the position
[voice leading?] than on the harmony [mebr auf die Lage als Harmonie}; for
no dissonance is resolved and the unity of key is not observed to the least
degree, since one can never know what the principal key of the piece is . . .
One begins most appropriately on C with 5/3 [sic]. The following CH with

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

217


=== PAGE 228 ===

218

1 4 | [ete]
5b wm $

=
t——th

Example 8-12. Vogler 1778, Tab. xxx, Fig 2

the diminished seventh is the seventh tone of D-minor. D with the 6/4 is an
inversion lying on the fifth degree of G minor. Eb with the suspended seventh
is the fifth degree of both keys of Ab... (Vogler 1778, pp. 176-177)

Use of Fundamental Bass

After the midcentury, Rameauian fundamental bass, notated on a separate
staff below a score, became quite widespread throughout Europe. Ap-
pearances of this notation with little or no explanation of its meaning and
purpose imply that authors expected their readers to be familiar with it,
much as modern theorists assume that musically literate persons under-
stand Roman numerals. Chapter 7 illustrates Martini’s and Mozart’s use
of fundamental bass to explain harmonic progressions in the 1770s and
1780s. About the same time, Vogler published numerous fundamental-
bass analyses of complete compositions in the three volumes of his Be-
trachtungen der Mannheimer Tonschule (1778-1781). The writings sur-
veyed here are somewhat earlier.

NICHELMANN

One work applying fundamental bass extensively is Die Melodie nach
ihrem Wesen sowobl, als nach ihren Eigenschaften (1755) by Christoph
Nichelmann (1717—1762).!1 Nichelmann, cembalist and composer in the
royal chapel of Frederick the Great since 1745, had been a choirboy under
J. S. Bach, and had studied composition with W. F. Bach, Keiser, G. P.
Telemann, Mattheson, Quantz, and Graun. Despite its title, Die Melodie
is primarily about style and harmonic theory. Nichelmann wrote it in
response to a dispute between the Berlin theorists Marpurg and Johann
Friedrich Agricola (1720-1774) over a favorite topic of the eighteenth
century: the relative merits of Italian and French music (in Marpurg 1749—
1750). Nichelmann believed that this dispute, like so many others of its

11. Christensen 1990b is the sole study of Nichelmann’s music theory. Discussions of

Nichelmann’s aesthetics appear in the informative MGG article by Thomas Langner, Helm
1960 (pp. 175 and 228-235), Goldschmidt 1915 (p. 141), and Fellerer 1962.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 229 ===

kind, missed the point. A good composition, he argues, is one in which
expression derives from proper harmony, not simply from a melody com-
posed without concern for the underlying harmony: “The more dependent
a song [Gesang] is on the harmonies [Zusammenstimmung] the more it is
melody (Melodie]” (p. 44). If one writes considering only the main melody,
or if one does not consider the proper harmonic context, as Nichelmann
believes many modern composers do, then arbitrary harmonies will result,
and the result will lack expressive power (p. 56). Nichelmann characterizes
these opposing positions with his adaptation of Wolfgang Caspar Printz’s
terms monodic and polyodic, originally introduced to differentiate two
methods of composition: monodic, in which one writes a single line and
then adds the remaining parts, and polyodic, in which the composer
conceives of all the parts together (Die Melodie, p. 14; Printz 1676-1796,
3, Chapters 11 and 18).

Unfortunately, as one historian has noted, Nichelmann “lacks a clear
head” (Goldschmidt 1915, p. 141). He does not clearly explain how to
differentiate monodic from polyodic music. But this does not stop him
from laying out a number of detailed analyses almost without parallel in
the eighteenth century: works by Agricola, J. S. and C. P. E. Bach, C. H.
Graun, Hasse, Lambert, Lully, Telemann, and others. Almost invariably,
these analyses consist of a fundamental bass and a recomposition of
problematic passages to demonstrate that a proper composition is essen-
tially polyodic. Although he argues that monodic and polyodic supersede
stylistic differentiations of the time and that it is possible to compose
polyodically in any style, he consistently criticizes galant features such as
slow harmonic rhythm, purely homophonic textures, rhythmicized repe-
titions of bass notes (Trommelbass), and the scalework and passagework
characteristic of Italian-style music. Clearly his predilections lay with the
music of J. S. and W. F. Bach, although even the music of J. S. Bach is
not immune from his criticism. Whatever his limitations in digesting many
German, French, and English writings on aesthetics, Nichelmann illumi-
nates for us the state of knowledge of fundamental bass theory in Germany
before Marpurg published his translation of D’Alembert’s Elemens in
1757.

A typical recomposition of Nichelmann’s appears in Example 8-13. The
extended harmonies in the monodic realization stand in stark contrast to
the prolonged harmonies (virtually in the Schenkerian sense of the term)
in the polyodic version. Although he never discusses the issue directly, the
latter realization implies that Nichelmann understood how basic harmon-
ies could be prolonged not only by inversion (as in nearly every measure),
but also via neighboring chords (the C-chord in m. 2 and the Bb-chord in
m. 7) and repetition (the repeated tonicizations of F in mm. 4-8).

Several idiosyncratic features of Nichelmann’s fundamental basses are

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

219


=== PAGE 230 ===

220

[etc.]

=a

Example 8-13. Nichelmann 1755, Exs. 8, 9, 10

evident here. Like Rameau, he is sensitive to root progressions by step,
but he does not invoke Rameau’s double emploi to explain them. Instead,
Nichelmann treats step progressions as two fifths with the middle chord
omitted. He notates the omitted chord as an interpolated sixteenth note
that does not reflect a chord in the music (mm. 2, 4, and 5). Some root
progressions up a fifth are analyzed as added-sixth chords like Rameau’s

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 231 ===

Example 8-14. Nichelmann 1755, Exs. 14, 15

subdominant (m. 7), but others are not (the progression leading to the
cadential 6/4 in measure 8). The fundamental bass to the polyodic real-
ization incorporates the grace notes (11-10 in mm. 2 and 3; cadential 6/4
in measure 8).

Nichelmann delays an explanation of fundamental-bass notation until
after several such examples: “The fundamental tones [Fundamental-
Klange] . . . only make apparent all the more clearly the progression of
the root-tones [Grund-Téne] which serve us in hearing music like a guide
or compass, whereby the connections of the tones are led back to the very
source from which they arise” (p. 40). He fails to explain his Rameauian
sensitivity to step progressions or the special notation he uses to explain
them. And he fails to explain his Rameauian use of implied dissonances
to prevent any sense of closure (as in the A chord in m. 2 and the E chord
in m. 3 of Example 8-14).

The first example Nichelmann treats is a composition for which he has
nothing but praise: the opening of the sarabande from J. S. Bach’s French
Suite in E major. Nichelmann’s extensive description of the harmonic
progressions and their propriety to the expressive purposes of the piece is
the earliest such harmonic-aesthetic analysis of a Bach composition and
merits full quotation here (see Example 8-14):!2

The progression of the tonic to its upper third with the chord of the major
third, upon which this [first] connection of different chords is based, is of
such strenuous force that a diminution of that force can be obtained only by
the following cadence on the sixth of the tonic, which prevents the soul from
becoming excessively sad. The following progression of the tonic [C# as a

12. This and Nichelmann’s other commentaries on J. S. Bach compositions are reprinted
in Schulze 1972, pp. 96-103, and discussed in Schulze 1984, pp. 135-145.

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory


=== PAGE 232 ===

222

triadic cadential goal] to the fourth of the key is pleasing not only because
of the good relationship which it has with the preceding chord as well as
with the prevailing tonic; but also because it serves as an introduction to the
following chord of the fifth of the key, in which the root of the first chord
[the A-chord] becomes the seventh. Precisely this harmony, the fifth of the
key, was the best means to lead to the tonic chord, and via the implied chord
of the fifth of the key, to the fifth of that fifth, and therefore to the harmony
of the second of the key taken with the major third, thereby securing the
cadence on the fifth of the key. This connection among different chords is
perfectly designed to satisfy our natural hunger for a varied harmony. It is
also perfectly suited to the special design of the composer.

The character of a sarabande obliges the composer to create just such a
connection of various chords, which can elevate the soul so much and place
it in a state of wonderment and reverence.

Now, the different chords are perfectly suited to make us gradually perceive
this state. They are, considering their connection, extraordinary and new.
Their development, i.e., their tempo and movement, the unevenness of the
various durations used here, the noted relationships—in a word, the rhythm
of these different chords is therefore created so that the attention, the seri-
ousness, the awe, in brief, the depicted passion can thereby give rise to similar
feelings. (pp. 59-60)

Nichelmann then muses whether these good effects arose by genius or by
long and hard work. Begging the question, he concludes that the composer,
“before he created this piece, must have been affected by the impression
of the different harmonies that are appropriate for the indicated purposes.
For no continuous piece can be considered without the preceding impres-
sion of various continuous chords.” Considering that Nichelmann had
known J. S. Bach and that he learned his compositional craft originally
from W. F. Bach, is it possible that this analysis and explanation of a
possible compositional process was his impression of J. S. Bach’s compo-
sitional process? And is it possible that this analysis represents the sorts
of discussions that took place between composition teacher and pupil
during this period, but that do not appear in print elsewhere?

Nichelmann’s treatise stirred up quite a tempest in the royal court in
Berlin. It was read, probably correctly, as an attack on the musical style
of several members of the court, particularly C. P. E. Bach, exacerbating
longstanding hostility between the two (Helm 1960, p. 175). Agricola,
who like Nichelmann had studied with J. S. Bach, noted in a letter dated
1771 that Nichelmann supported “the composition style of the older
Italians, the non-Italianized French, and the older Germans such as Tele-
mann and Handel . . . but Nichelmann certainly went too far” (Agricola
1786, p. 817).

Die Melodie sparked several critiques and a response by Nichelmann.
Ernst Gottlieb Baron (1696-1760), a lutenist and composer in Berlin,

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 233 ===

quickly penned a twelve-page attack (Baron 1756) countering Nichel-
mann’s basic premise with the galant position on melody already enunci-
ated by Mattheson in the 1730s and by Riepel in 1752: “If one wished to
establish the harmonic triad as the main source and derive the melody
from it, one would be putting the cart before the horse, for a hundred
passages could be drawn out of frequent inversion of a chord, but never
a melody, which must have an orderly sequence” (Baron 1756, pp. 11—
12).

Another sixteen-page pamphlet also appeared shortly under the pseu-
donym Caspar Diinkelfeind (Enemy of Darkness). This work is often
attributed to C. P. E. Bach, but comments on p. 15 in defense of Rameau
(namely that Rameau believed that melody and harmony both contributed
to melodiousness), the self-description of the author as “an amateur”
(Liebhaber, title page), the writing style, and various philosophical posi-
tions cast some doubt on this. But if Bach did not write this critique, he
probably encouraged this harsh attack, which mocks Nichelmann as an
incompetent plagiarist, criticizes many of his ideas, and defends some of
the C. P. E. Bach works Nichelmann had attacked.

Nichelmann’s extensive use of fundamental bass with such little expla-
nation of either its nature or the details of his own approach implies that
even before Marpurg’s 1757 translation of D’Alembert’s Elemens, German
musicians were familiar with fundamental bass. None of Nichelmann’s
critics even cites his use of fundamental bass, not to mention his interpre-
tation of step progressions, his use of implied dissonances, the fact that
Nichelmann does not explain any of this, or his analyses themselves. If
Nichelmann had been arguing his case with an unfamiliar analytic notation
or theoretical method, it is likely that at least one of his critics would have
commented on it.

In addition, the casual presence of fundamental bass, of omitted chords
as a structural explanation, and of analytical activity in the Berlin circle
in the 1750s sheds light on the origins of theories commonly associated
with Kirnberger in the 1770s. Kirnberger espouses many concepts first
raised by Nichelmann. He supports a polyodic approach to composition
when he urges that all the parts be of interest to avoid a texture where
the entire “affection and true expression of the piece” is “concentrated
solely in a single voice” (Kirnberger 1771-1779, 1, p. 159; Beach-Thym
1982, p. 174). And, like Nichelmann, he uses the notion of omitted chords
to explain various progressions, although not the step progressions that
Nichelmann explains by an interpolated bass. Nichelmann and Kirnberger
had common roots in the Bach circle in Leipzig, but Nichelmann was
older than Kirnberger and had left Leipzig before Kirnberger arrived. The
two theorists knew each other in Berlin. Kirnberger devotes three columns
in the article Melodie in Johann Georg Sulzer’s Allgemeine Theorie der

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

223


=== PAGE 234 ===

224

Sch6nen Kiinste to listing each chapter heading of Nichelmann’s book and
briefly summarizing their contents.

There remains the question of where Nichelmann learned about fun-
damental bass. Among his teachers, Mattheson, Quantz, and Telemann
could hardly have been the source. Mattheson was no supporter of Ra-
meau’s. Quantz, to judge from his 1752 flute method (Quantz 1752) and
his reply to Marpurg’s 1760 critique of Sorge (Marpurg 1754-1778, 5
[1761], pp. 113-114), seems to have had a lifelong disinterest in what he
considered speculative theory. And Telemann’s published theoretical ma-
terials from the 1730s show no familiarity with Rameau’s theories. Since
Nichelmann differs with Rameau and Marpurg on crucial points, neither
Rameau’s published works nor Marpurg’s as-yet unpublished works could
have been the sole source. Did Nichelmann learn fundamental bass entirely
on his own? Did he learn it from musicians in the Bach circle in Leipzig
or at the Berlin court? Did he simply pick up ideas that were in common
circulation? At this time, a definitive answer is not possible.

OTHER THEORISTS

Within Germany, Lohlein’s Clavier-Schule of 1765 also includes an ex-
tended example with fundamental-bass notation in his discussion of how
to work out a fantasie. A composition with annotations runs from
pp. 181-186, accompanied throughout by its fundamental bass. Léhlein
explains that this “harmonic skeleton [harmonische Skelet] under the bass”
shows how to elaborate “fundamental harmonies.” Again, there is no
further explanation of the notation, implying he expected readers to be
familiar with it. In addition, the fact that each German writer of this
period who used fundamental bass referred to it with a different name
implies an oral tradition, not a borrowing from a single published source,
whether German or foreign. Léhlein’s popular work also shows the extent
to which a traditional approach to thoroughbass was becoming increas-
ingly outdated after the midcentury. As he explains in the 1781 edition,
even many teachers could not deal with the subject any more: “I have
found that the easiest and surest path is to build the foundation upon the
two principal harmonies, namely the triad [Hauptaccord] and the seventh-
chord; the student must not be led further until he has clearly grasped
these foundations.”

Another theorist using fundamental bass idiosyncratically is Giorgio
Antoniotto (c. 1692—1776), an Italian living in London. His substantial
1760 treatise L’Arte Armonica or A Treatise on the Composition of
Musick boasts luminaries like Avison, Burney, and Hawkins among its
many subscribers. Antoniotto derives lines for counterpoint from funda-
mental-bass progressions such as descending fifths (the “Skip of Ca-
dence”), ascending fifths, and motions by thirds. Each such derived set of

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 235 ===

By 3 8 5

tl
= ares
3 8 5 3 letc.]
3 ==
8 5 3 8
a {— + —
= — ot _—
Ill (=I and 1)
8 3 3 8 IV a 3 7
= oe o-
é == =: == — ———— .
5 3 8 5 5 3 7 3 [ete]
3 8 5 3
= o =
© as — = £
fetc.] V land IV)
5 8 5 8 8 5 8
a = —* =
== = —=
8 5 8 5 3 7 [etc.]
8 s
SSS SS ===
3 3
ett
Se

Example 8-15. Antoniotto 1760, Plate 17

lines is a “canon” in the sense of a law. Book 1 (pp. 1-62) presents forty-
five canons dealing with diatonic progressions, Book 2 extends these pro-
gressions to the chromatic octave, and Book 3 elaborates these progres-
sions with inversions of the harmonies, suspensions, and so forth.

Example 8-15, an illustration of the openings of the first five canons for
a diatonic progression by descending fifths, gives an idea of his method.
Antoniotto offers eighteen such canons in up to sixteen voices for this one
progression.

The centerpiece of the treatise (pp. 88ff.) is his demonstration that these
canons provide the basis for Corelli’s Violin Sonata, opus 5, number tr.
He presents Corelli’s melody-bass framework with the underlying har-
monic derivation of the voice leading below (see Example 8-16). As in
Nichelmann’s treatise, the explanatory staff system offers complete chords,
and the fundamental bass adds chords to explain what would otherwise
have been root progressions by step. Unlike Nichelmann, Antoniotto uses
Rameau’s double emploi to explain these step progressions.

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

225


=== PAGE 236 ===

226

Adagio

| [etc.]

tf
n
r
Ly

=
Sa
: a

Example 8-16. Antoniotto 1760, Plate 54

fetc.]

Another Italian, this one living in Italy, who used fundamental bass to
teach harmonization is Vincenzo Manfredini. Part 2 of his Regole armon-
iche (1775) describes “a new system of learning bass accompaniment.”
The result is quite similar to what Mozart used to teach Barbara Ployer
in the next decade. A fundamental bass is worked out, from which the
actual bass (basso continuo) is drawn. Other aspects of Manfredini’s work
are in the partimento tradition.

Permutation

One aspect of eighteenth-century theory sometimes regarded as more
diverting than serious is permutation (ars combinatoria). Although
some theorists were more absorbed than others in such mathematics, it
permeates a rather wide range of music theory, and its presence often
highlights important aspects of musical structure (Ratner 1970). Even
theorists who disparaged using mathematics to justify harmonic progres-
sions were themselves addicted to permutations. In 1757, C. P. E. Bach
published a way to generate 429,536,481 examples of invertible counter-
point “without knowing the rules” (Helm 1966). And Riepel, who ridi-
cules Rameau’s use of mathematics (Riepel 1755, p. 53), is perhaps the
century’s most eager advocate of permutations: “The unique art of per-
mutations, by which one can uncover in a single day far more than 99
themes, is at least 99 times healthier for composition than the calculation
of ratios” (Riepel 1755, p. 25). Riepel calculates permutations that yield
numbers as high as 10° (ibid., p. 26) and demonstrates applications on
all sorts of musical elements: melodic pitches, rhythms, bowings, even
harmonies.

One of his most interesting applications is to harmony (Riepel 1757).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 237 ===

T
= ——s or =
1 e o ou o o oe
3 4 5 6 7 8 4 5 6
2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3
x. —E x 1 Lom ete. ]
#1 #2 #8 #4 #5 #6 #7 #8 #9 3 #21

@) Y (#2) 4 (#3)

a r aa

#3 #3)

Example 8-17. Riepel 1757, pp. 57ff

He considers all the possible three-note and four-note combinations of
diatonic scale steps over a given bass, rejects those four-note simultaneities
with three consecutive scale steps (such as 4/3/2, 5/4/3, 6/5/4) as “cater-
wauling,” and demonstrates that many others are quite usable in harmony
(see Example 8-17). This whole procedure may strike some as downright
silly, but Riepel actually sheds some light on an aspect of tonal structure
that has received virtually no attention at all from theorists—simultaneity
structure of harmonies regardless of their functional role (chord versus
nonharmonic tone, consonance versus dissonance). He is well aware that
these chords have different uses: “They could be divided into good, me-
dium, and poor. The good ones are in daily use and are known everywhere.
As for the poor ones, one might use perhaps only one or two all year in
an adagio if, for example, the text called for it” (p. 64). But his examples
show how a composer can exploit these harmonies with care. For instance,
the first excerpt builds up to his “triad number 1,” which contains two
seconds (C-D; D-E), by presenting two simultaneities with a single second
each (E-F, then C-D, then C-D-E). Likewise, tetrad number 3, which
contains two steps (C-D-E), follows a simultaneity with two steps (B-C,
C-D) and precedes another simultaneity with one step (C-D in the super-
tonic chord).

Looking at tonal music from this perspective brings out unexpected
relationships. For instance, in the much-discussed variations theme that

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

227


=== PAGE 238 ===

228

Andante grazioso

03
AN Nd Nie

—— — =

i

2
pt —}

Ue Oil kx Tx TT TxT TTTx x x TT TT+x T

Example 8-18. Mozart, Piano Sonata, K.331, first movement

opens Mozart’s Piano Sonata, K. 331, virtually every simultaneity is either
a major triad (labeled T in the following example), a minor-third-plus-
whole-step (labeled X), or a combination of one of these (T+X) (see
Example 8-18). The almost exclusive use of these two simultaneities is
part of what gives this theme its special sonority. And since Mozart seems
to have been familiar with Riepel’s writings (Anderson, 1966, letter of
September 15, 1773), he may well have been consciously aware of these
structural relationships."

Another theorist who generally avoids using mathematics to back up
his harmonic theories but who used permutations for various purposes is
Kirnberger. His invocation of possible arpeggiation patterns is similar to
Riepel (Kirnberger 1771-1779, 1, pp. 211-213; Beach-Thym 1982,
p. 224). But other applications are idiosyncractic. One concerns the tra-
ditional topic of invertible counterpoint, the subject matter of about one
half of his composition treatise (ibid., 2, Parts 2 and 3).

A further application of permutations is in a spate of dice games that
began in 1757 with Kirnberger’s Ever-Ready Polonaise and Menuet Com-
poser and continued well into the next century. Kirnberger offers six
melodic possibilities for each measure of each dance type and asks the
“composer” to cast a die for each measure to decide which melody to
play. The harmonic structure of each resulting dance remains the same,
but the number of possible melodies is immense. Marpurg tutted that not
every connection would actually yield a sensible melody—but who’s count-
ing? (Marpurg 1754-1778, 3, p. 145). Most later dice games are by
otherwise insignificant musicians, though one is questionably attributed
to C. P. E. Bach (a c. 1790 dice game producing waltzes) and another to
Haydn (Gioco filarmonico published in Naples c. 1793 and 1812).!4

These lighthearted works reflect in their own way the rationalistic me-

13. Lester 1981 and Lewin 1981 pursue the issue of simultaneities apart from tonal

function.
14. Gerigk 1934 surveys the genre. Feil 1955 offers provocative insights into the signif-

icance of dice games (Chapter 4).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 239 ===

chanistic spirit of the age. Just as the French philosophes believed that the
proper application of reason could teach them the basics of musical com-
position without a traditional apprenticeship, the writers of these pam-
phlets believed that reason could produce a mechanical method of com-
posing acceptable pieces. Many a bourgeois host probably found it both
easier and cheaper to procure one of these methods and produce his own
dance music than to have to continually purchase the latest sheet music.

Despite the apparent emphasis on melodic line in these games, they
actually illuminate the continuing dominance of bass motions and har-
monic progressions in determining the coherence of a composition. As
with popular music of many eras, seemingly innumerable melodic possi-
bilities occur over a small number of harmonic progressions. By offering
innumerable melodies to go with the same bass patterns, these methods
are part of the tradition of teaching composition by rhythmicizing tho-
roughbass realizations (Niedt) or drawing the actual voice leading of a
piece from the underlying harmonic progressions (as in Lippius, Rameau,
Nichelmann, or Antoniotto). As Marpurg explained, C. P. E. Bach’s per-
mutational game for producing invertible counterpoint could only be put
together by maintaining the same root progression in each possible solu-
tion—showing that Bach understood the nature of root progressions,
whether or not he chose to include that concept in his thoroughbass
manual.

“The Genealogical Tree of Harmony”

No survey of harmonic thinking in the eighteenth century would be com-
plete without resurrecting at least one of the imaginative didactic publi-
cations of the time: the three-page folio-sized Arbre Généalogique de
Pharmonie (c. 1767) by Francois-Guillaume Vial (c. 1730—?), nephew of
the violinist and composer Jean-Marie Leclair (1697~—1764) (Fétis 1833—
1844). Example 8-19 is the imaginatively engraved frontispiece. Instruc-
tions explain how to use the compass (boussole) by fifths to learn key
names, key signatures, the three principal notes in a key (tonic, subdom-
inant, dominant), the order of sharps and flats, and the location of the
semitones in each scale. The compass by thirds is useful for accompanying
or composing because it shows how to make perfect chords, seventh
chords, added-sixth chords, diminished seventh chords, all their inversions,
and also how to construct chords by subposition. According to Vial, the
tree itself is helpful in fingering and voice leading by showing common
tones, in creating melodies from the voice leading that connects chords,
in finding the fundamental bass, in preparing and resolving dissonances,
in learning the cadences and their role in the Rule of the Octave, and in
modulating by showing keys related in various ways.

Changing Aspects of Harmonic Theory

229


=== PAGE 240 ===

230

BLOCKED IMAGE AT THE
REQUEST OF THE PUBLISHER

Example 8-19. Vial [c. 1767], frontispiece (Music Division, The New York
Public Library for the Performing Arts, Astor, Lenox and Tilden Foundations)

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 241 ===

CHAPTER NINE

EE OK SP

The Marpurg-Kirnberger
Disputes

People speak the worse [of fundamental bass] in direct proportion to
their ignorance of it.
Gianotti 1759, p. xi

THE MOST SIGNIFICANT dispute concerning harmonic theory in the
second half of the eighteenth century is that between Friedrich Wilhelm
Marpurg (1718-1795) and Johann Philipp Kirnberger (1721-1783). Each
man had been associated with the Bach circle in Leipzig. And each was
an important and prolific author in Berlin, the city that Charles Burney
described in 1772 as “the capital of a prince . . . where both the theory
and practice of music had been more profoundly treated than elsewhere,
by professors of great and acknowledged abilities, who are still living; and
who have published the result of their long experience and superior skill
in treatises which are regarded throughout Germany as classical” (Scholes
1959, P. 159).

Marpurg viewed himself as Mattheson’s successor in the role of musical
critic at large. During the late 1750s and 1760s he took on Sorge, Daube,
and others who challenged his conception of music theory. But as inter-
esting as those writers are, neither is of Kirnberger’s stature. And in no
other polemic do the issues seem as clear as in his dispute with Kirnberger.

Marpurg and Kirnberger sparred on a number of issues in the late 1750s
and again in the 1770s. Most historical interest has centered on their later
dispute. Marpurg, insisting he was Rameau’s advocate, attacked the ap-
plication of fundamental bass and the interpretation of suspensions in
Kirnberger’s composition text Die Kunst des reinen Satzes (1771-1779)
and a companion work, Die wahren Grundsdtze zum Gebrauch der Har-


=== PAGE 242 ===

232

monie (1773). In an often cited passage, Marpurg states his notion of
Rameau’s fundamental bass and explains why it differs from Kirnberger’s:

Rameau designated by the word fundamental bass a bass which contains
nothing more than the simple fundamental chords . . . without the slightest
connection among them. I say without the slightest connection because in
laying out the fundamental chords no consideration whatever is given to the
type of progression; rather each individual chord of the fundamental bass is
merely reduced to its root form. (Marpurg 1776, p. 232)

This seems to draw the line between a vertical conception of harmony as
isolated chords and a more linear conception of harmony and voice leading
in which the nature of the progression determines a proper analysis of
chordal structure.

The same perspectives seem to underlie their views on suspensions.
Marpurg utilizes the theory of subposed chords, extending subposition to
create chords of the thirteenth and even the fifteenth. Kirnberger, by
contrast, views some suspended dissonances as chord sevenths, while oth-
ers are linear suspensions temporarily delaying chord tones.

As in his earlier dispute with Sorge, Marpurg appealed to his compa-
triots, claiming that his position represents the true German tradition of
J. S. Bach and others. Kirnberger countered that by rejecting French theory
he stood in the true German Bach tradition. C. P. E. Bach seemed to settle
the matter in a letter from which Kirnberger quoted a few sentences: “You
can proclaim loudly that my foundations and those of my late father are
anti-Rameau” (Kirnberger 1771-1779, 2, p. 188).

Taking this polemic at face value, many historians have characterized
the dispute as a confrontation between a Rameau-Marpurg view of har-
mony consisting of isolated vertical chords and a Kirnberger-Bach view of
harmony as a more linear phenomenon derived from thoroughbass think-
ing. But when placed in context, Marpurg’s and Kirnberger’s positions
cannot be characterized in that manner. On most of the issues they de-
bated, Kirnberger’s positions are actually very close to Rameau’s theories
(though Kirnberger may not have been aware of that), and Marpurg’s
positions are not only directly opposed to Rameau’s theories, but often
reflect a thoroughbass perspective.

As a result, despite its clear wording, C. P. E. Bach’s statement simply
cannot be read as a condemnation of the contents of Rameau’s theories.
If Bach meant to defend Kirnberger in his dispute with Marpurg—and
without the context of the sentences that Kirnberger quotes, it is not clear
just what Bach’s statement refers to—Bach was in fact defending much of
Rameau’s conception of music! What comes through clearly from Kirn-
berger’s anti-Rameau polemic and C. P. E. Bach’s retort is that although
Rameau’s writings themselves may have remained unread in many circles,

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 243 ===

quite a few Rameauian tenets had become so widespread and so pervasive
that prominent musicians believed them to be the ideas of German musical
traditions and not relatively recent and foreign discoveries.

This chapter explores the writings of Marpurg and Kirnberger to place
their disputes into the context of theoretical issues explored in the preced-
ing chapters.

Marpurg as Theorist

LIFE AND PUBLICATIONS

Little is known about Marpurg’s early life (Serwer 1980 surveys what is
known). He apparently traveled widely through the mid-1740s, living in
Paris in 1746. But he probably neither met nor studied with Rameau,
since he most likely would have loudly proclaimed such a connection in
his later defenses of what he viewed as Rameau’s theories. While in Paris,
he also probably lacked any personal contact with D’Alembert, whose
Elemens he published in German in 1757. This is not surprising, consid-
ering that D’Alembert’s interest in music theory did not begin until after
Marpurg had left Paris. He probably met D’Alembert when the latter
visited Berlin in 1763, but there seems to be no written record of their
contact.

After he returned to Germany, Marpurg was in Leipzig for a short
while, making the acquaintance of the Bach family. He then moved to
Berlin, where in 1749 he began publishing music books and journals at
an astounding pace. Within three years, his reputation was such that J. S.
Bach’s heirs turned to him to write a preface to the Art of the Fugue
(published in 1752). Shortly thereafter, Marpurg published his two-volume
Abhandlung von der Fuge (1753-1754), which remains a classic text.

Marpurg’s three journals contain book reviews, biographies, transla-
tions of important foreign works, and articles on theory, aesthetics, and
temperament. Their lively style was designed to attract professionals as
well as musically literate amateurs:

1. Critische Musicus an der Spree (1749-1750), whose title honors
earlier journals by Mattheson and Scheibe (the River Spree runs
through Berlin).

2. Historisch-kritische Beytrage zur Aufnahme der Musik (1754-1762,
1778), with most entries signed with pseudonyms, hiding the fact
that Marpurg wrote almost all the items.!

1. Daube, for instance, wrote to Marpurg in 1756 protesting an unfavorable review at
the hands of a “Herr Gemmel,” unaware that Marpurg himself was the author (Daube
1757). In 1772, Christoph Schroter still believed that the pseudonymous “Herr Gemmel”
was Daube’s reviewer (Schréter 1772, p. xviii).

The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes

233


=== PAGE 244 ===

3. Kritische Briefe tiber die Tonkunst (1759-1763) in the form of letters
to famous musicians.

Other works from this period of activity include:

Die Kunst das Clavier zu spielen, in several editions (1750-1762) and
two French translations.

Anleitung zum Clavierspielen (1755 and 1765).

Anfangsgriinde der Theoretischen Music (1757) on temperament.

Handbuch bey dem Generalbass und der Composition . . . fiir Anfanger
und Getibter (1757-1762), a comprehensive text.

Anleitung zum Singcomposition (1758), an exhaustive discussion of
text-setting in German, Latin, and Italian (for example, pp. 122-134
categorize 2,130 ending-syllables in German).

Anleitung zur Musik tiberhaupt (1763), primarily on singing.

In addition, Marpurg translated D’Alembert’s Elemens in 1757 and pub-
lished a critique of Sorge’s Anleitung zum Generalbass (1760). After this
period of musical activity, during which he apparently was in continual
financial hardship, Marpurg became director of the Prussian lottery, pub-
lishing only a few musical items:

Versuch tiber die musikalische Temperatur, nebst einem Anhang tiber
den Rameau- und Kirnbergerschen Grundbass (1776).

A final volume of the Historisch-kritische Beytrage zur Aufnahme der
Musik dealing with temperament (1778).

Legende einer Musikheiligen (1786), containing anecdotes and biogra-
phies of contemporaries (including Haydn and Vogler).

Overall, Marpurg’s role in Berlin in the 1750s to 1770s is comparable
to Mattheson’s in Hamburg in the 1710s to 1730s. Like Mattheson, he
broadcast a wide range of thinking. And his pugnacious nature, also like
Mattheson’s, brought many issues to the fore that might have otherwise
remained unpublished. For instance, it is due to Marpurg’s encouragement
that Sorge wrote his Compendium (Sorge 1760, forward) to which Mar-
purg then responded.

SPECULATIVE AND PRACTICAL THEORY
Marpurg clearly recognized the difference between speculative and prac-
tical theory:

I can name no masters more distinguished than Rameau and [C. P. E.] Bach,
the former in theory and the latter in practice.

Thoroughbass was invented for the facilitation of performance; funda-
mental bass, however, [was invented] to explain much more reasonably the
relationship between the rules of composition and thoroughbass, and, so to

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 245 ===

say, to be able to survey them in one glance. (Marpurg 1755-1762, 1, fol.

3', P. 3)

His separation of these theoretical realms explains why he can adopt
such rigid positions about the nature of fundamental bass (as quoted earlier
in this chapter) and yet write influential practical works. It is why he can
freely admit that “it was never a state secret” that suspensions arise from
extending notes into the following chord, yet at the same time insist “that
the question is, having discovered all the usable harmonies that arise from
the process of suspension, how they should be presented systematically in
a reasonable pedagogical method,” which he believes can be done only
via the theory of subposition. It is why he can assert that the fundamental
bass, in which all chord inversions are functionally equivalent, is the proper
way to understand harmonies, and yet criticize Sorge for having used 6/4
chords as if they were equivalent to root-position chords. It is why he can
agree with Sorge that triads on scale-steps 1, 4, and 5 generate the major
and minor scales, but disagree with Sorge’s reasons for taking this position
(Marpurg 1760, Chapter 3). And it is why he occasionally adopts a casual
attitude toward systematic issues, such as during his dispute with Sorge
when he allows that one could call a fourth a consonance or a dissonance,
or call a suspended fourth a fourth or an eleventh—all that he cares about
in a practical work is that its proper use be explained (Marpurg 1760,
Pp. 145).

Marpurg’s separation of speculative and practical theory also makes
him much less dogmatic on certain issues than Rameau. On the contentious
matter of the priority of harmony or melody, he sides with Rameau. But
he also understands both positions:

To have a harmony there must be at least two melodies, one higher and one
lower, and consequently harmony is not really present before the melodies;
therefore in this sense harmony always arises from melody. This is Herr von
[!] Mattheson’s opinion. But if one further considers that no simple melody
can be conceived that does not have its basis in fundamental harmonies, then
in this sense harmony precedes melody. This is Rameau’s opinion. (Marpurg

1755-1762, I, p. 26)

Many modern commentators on Marpurg’s harmonic theories concen-
trate on his speculative ideas (Shirlaw 1917, pp. 308-316, Mekeel 1960).
Even if this focus yields accurate statements about this side of his theoriz-
ing, it is insufficient to explain the popularity and influence of his practical
works,

MARPURG’S IDEAS AND RAMEAU’S THEORIES

Although Marpurg may have believed his views were consonant with those
of Rameau, and attacked all who disagreed with him as departing from

The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes

235


=== PAGE 246 ===

236

e_ =

iy
{jt
| | 2 =a

=e:
t t t

Example 9-1. Marpurg 1755-1762, 1, p. 39 (scored from tablature)

Rameau’s theories, in fact his own ideas often bear only a tangential
relationship to those of the French theorist. Concerning chord generation,
Marpurg insists on arranging all the possible notes in a diatonic and
chromatic scale to form chords, where Rameau had done exactly the
opposite, generating chords first and then creating scales out of the chords
(Shirlaw 1917, pp. 309-310).

On many practical issues, Marpurg adopts a thoroughbass perspective,
rather than a Rameauian outlook. For instance, in the Handbuch he
discusses various uses of what he calls the second inversion of a diminished
triad (see Example 9-1). To categorize the three highlighted chords as
diminished triads is to concentrate solely on their pitch content, not their
context, just as Heinichen or C. P. E. Bach might have done since in terms
of their figuring, each chord is the same.

In another explanation reminiscent of Heinichen, Marpurg explains that
the unprepared seventh over A shown in Example 9-2 arises from “the
omission of an afterbeat chord [nachschlagenden Harmonie] in which the
ninth and seventh should have resolved.”

Similarly, pages 86 to 145 of the Handbuch discuss suspensions accord-
ing to the interval involved. Although Marpurg explains many suspensions
as members of seventh chords, the discussion as a whole is unlike any
found in Rameau’s works. In fact, when he discusses chord sevenths that
form consonances against the bass (such as the fifth in a 6/5 chord),
Marpurg speaks in the idiom of Gasparini’s thoroughbass treatise. He
denies the very basis of Rameau’s inversional theory by calling such inter-

f T

Example 9-2. Marpurg 1755-1762, 1, p. 55 (scored from tablature)

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 247 ===

Example 9-3. Marpurg 1755-1762, 2, Table 2, Fig. 15a

vals “pseudo-dissonances” that must resolve even though they are con-
sonant (Marpurg 1755-1762, 2, pp. 78-79; Gasparini 1708, p. 53).

Marpurg also speaks like a thoroughbass theorist in explaining other
dissonances. For instance, he notes that sevenths generally resolve down.
But some sevenths resolve up, like A-C-E-G# (Marpurg 1755-1762, 1,
p. 54-55). For Rameau, G# in such a chord is not a seventh at all, but
rather a leading tone in a chord by subposition.

Marpurg even invokes thoroughbass when he extends some of Rameau’s
tenets. When he adds thirteenths and even fifteenths to Rameau’s category
of subposed chords (Marpurg 1776, pp. 250, 260), he claims that he is
acting not under Rameau’s influence, but in imitation of two passages in
C. P. E. Bach 1762 that deal with pedal points: Chapter 14, where Bach
says that a 7/6/2 chord, “like others of its type, is best explained if the
bass is removed” (Mitchell 1949, p. 284), and Chapter 24 on pedals,
where Bach notes that “if one wishes to explain most clearly these alter-
ations of the harmony and special juxtapositions of intervals, remove the
bass” (ibid., p. 319).

In other matters, Marpurg simply rejects Rameauian tenets. Like Sorge,
he finds dissonances within some types of triads. So he denies that the
seventh is “the mother of all dissonant chords” (Marpurg 1755-1762, I,
p. 30), in the process rejecting a major motivation for Rameau’s theory
of subposition.

Likewise, Marpurg seems unaware of Rameau’s notion of implied dis-
sonances. Discussing Example 9-3, he challenges those theorists who insist
that a dissonant fourth must be prepared (Marpurg 1755-1762, 2, p. 79).
Rameau would have insisted that the upbeat chord contained an implied
seventh preparing the C.

Marpurg also rejects added-sixth chords (Marpurg 1776, p. 279-280)
and along with them double employment of dissonance and an interpretive
role for fundamental bass progressions. In fact, when he discusses chord
progressions (Marpurg 1755-1762, I, pp. 84-100, 2, pp. 71-80), he
never once mentions root motion. He also never notates a fundamental
bass on a separate staff under any chord progression in any of his own
works. Instead, he bases his discussion on Fux’s four rules of voice leading

The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes

237


=== PAGE 248 ===

238

iy
eee See
HS =e ae a=]

6 6

Seer ee

8) 6 6

SS ee

Example 9-4. Marpurg 1755-1762, 3, Plate 1, Fig. 20

(without crediting Fux). His instructions for harmonizing a melody are
quite unlike the Rameau-style approach adopted by Mozart for Barbara
Ployer. Instead, Marpurg begins with bass-melody structures in two voices,
trying out eight bass lines to a given melody and evaluating each (see
Example 9-4).

Comparing these basses, Marpurg comments on the contrapuntal inter-
val structure as well as the harmonies. In contrast to Mozart’s fundamen-
tal-bass approach to harmonization, where each version generally main-
tains the same harmonies, Marpurg freely changes chords from version to
version. In this example, he complains that the first and second basses
lack intervallic variety. The third merely interchanges G and D chords
(Marpurg does not refer to them as tonic and dominant). The fourth bass
has more variety, but the end lacks harmonic change. The fifth bass is the

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 249 ===

best yet, but Marpurg dislikes the D chord between two B-major triads.
The sixth is the “true bass.” The seventh and eighth are also good,
although the first downbeat chord in the former is “rather hard right at
the opening.”

The order of instruction that Marpurg recommends for composition
students agrees with neither a thoroughbass approach nor Rameau’s the-
ories. Musicians as diverse as Rameau, Niedt, J. S. Bach, C. P. E. Bach,
and Kirnberger all recommend beginning instruction in composition with
writing for four voices. But Marpurg begins with two-voice structures, as
shown, and then works through combinations of from three to nine voices.

It should be clear that on a host of issues including chord types, chord
inversions, dissonances, chord progressions, the use of fundamental bass,
and compositional method—in brief, on most matters of harmonic the-
ory—Marpurg differs substantially from Rameau’s theories. Interestingly,
Marpurg’s brief summary of Rameau’s harmonic theory in his Kritische
Briefe (Marpurg 1759-1763, pp. §8—60) is accurate as far as it goes, even
where Marpurg’s own approach elsewhere differs from that of Rameau.
But that brief summary does not touch on many of the areas in which he
differs from Rameau’s theories. As shown later in this chapter, on many
points where Marpurg’s approach differs from Rameau’s, Kirnberger fol-
lows Rameau’s theories. Thus, the readiness of German musicians to
believe that Marpurg’s works actually represented Rameau’s theories, and
the failure of a single German musician to challenge Marpurg on this issue
during the 1750s, 1760s, or 1770s, is a sure indication of ignorance of
Rameau’s writings in their original form by German musicians.

Kirnberger as Theorist

Johann Philipp Kirnberger is one of the major theorists of the late eigh-
teenth century. Despite his admitted difficulties organizing his thoughts on
paper (Bellermann 1872, col. 458), and despite his conservative attitude
toward various aspects of newer music, his writings comprise the best-
organized comprehensive approach to harmony and composition prior to
Koch’s treatise of the mid-1780s. He spent a few months in Leipzig in
1741, probably studying composition with J. S. Bach (Dadelsen 1958),
and eventually settled in Berlin, where he was active as a composer,
violinist, and teacher. His major works are?

2. It was once thought he studied for a longer period with J. S. Bach.

3. The major studies of Kirnberger are Mekeel 1960, Beach 1974a, Grant 1976 and
1977, and Serwer 1970. Mekeel’s and Beach’s studies, despite disclaimers, take Marpurg
at his word that he represents Rameau’s ideas, thereby distorting the context of Kirnberger’s
theories and the Kirnberger-Marpurg disputes. Appendix B in Grant 1976 provides more
details.

The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes

239


=== PAGE 250 ===

240

Die Kunst des reinen Satzes (The Art of Strict Composition; 1771—
1779). Vol. 1 and Part 1 of Vol. 2 are on harmony and composition;
the remainder (about one half the length of the whole) is on double
(invertible) counterpoint.

Music articles in the encyclopedic Allgemeine Theorie der schénen
Kunste (General Theory of the Fine Arts),+ 1771-1774, by Johann
Georg Sulzer (1720-1779). Kirnberger’s pupil Johann Abraham Peter
Schulz (1747-1800) claimed in 1800 that Kirnberger wrote the music
articles from A to I, and was assisted by Schulz in the articles from
K to R. Schulz claims the articles from S to Z as his own (Schulz
1800, cols. 276-277; Spazier 1800, col. 593). But a 1783 letter by
Kirnberger contradicts Schulz (Bellermann 1872).

Die wahren Grundsatze zum Gebrauch der Harmonie (1773), a short
work summarizing Die Kunst des reinen Satzes.$

Grundsdatze des Generalbasses als erste Linien zur Composition (c.
1781), a summary of Kirnberger’s theories intended as a reader’s
introduction to the Kunst des reinen Satzes.

Gedanken iiber die verschiedenen Lehrarten in der Komposition, als
Vorbereitung zur Fugenkenntniss (1782).

Two other works were written for amateurs: Der allezeit fertige Polon-
oisen- und Menuettencomponist (1757), a dice game for composing
polonaises and minuets; Methode, Sonaten aus’m Ermel zu schiiddeln
(1783), explaining how to replace the melody and then the bass of
an extant composition to create a new piece. Feil 1955 and Newman
1961 show how these lighthearted works underscore important as-
pects of musical thinking.

Probably without realizing how much he was borrowing, Kirnberger
based much of his approach to harmony on Rameau’s ideas, including

4. Or The Theory of Polite Arts, as Burney translated the title (Scholes 1959, p. 159).

5. Schulz claimed to have written this work but made his claim only after anyone who
could contradict him was no longer alive (Schulz 1800, col. 278, fn.). Neither Marpurg, in
attacking this work, nor C. P. E. Bach, in defending Kirnberger, questioned Kirnberger’s
authorship. There are discernible differences in writing style between Die Kunst and this
work, but those can be attributed to the differences between a treatise and a summary.
David Beach, who believes that Schulz was the author, argues that there are substantial
differences in theoretical tenets between Die Kunst and this work and that therefore this
work should be dissociated from Kirnberger’s other writings (Beach 1974a, p. 9). Cecil
Grant, however, argues convincingly that the supposedly new positions in this work are
implicitly present in Die Kunst (Grant 1976, pp. 36-40). In addition, it strains credulity
that Kirnberger would have published a work he disagreed with under his own name and
then gone to great lengths to defend it. So for the purposes of the present discussion, it is
assumed that Kirnberger agreed fully with the contents of Die wabren Grundsdtze, whether
or not he actually wrote it.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 251 ===

chord inversion, the seventh chord as a source of dissonance, fundamental
bass to interpret chord progressions, and evaded cadences to promote
harmonic continuity. He endorses Rameau’s argument about the priority
of harmony over melody: “Each piece always has as its basis a series of
chords following one another according to certain rules; from these
[chords] the melodies of single voices are in part determined” (Sulzer
1771-1774, Accord; compare Bass). He even echoes Rameau’s 1732 sug-
gestion to reform thoroughbass notation by using letters to represent chord
roots (Sulzer 1771-1774, Bezifferung).

But in many areas of harmonic theory, Kirnberger avoids the most
problematic aspects of Rameau’s theorizing in favor of greater conceptual
and pedagogical clarity. Most important, he omits or minimizes most of
Rameau’s speculative theories. He was aware of acoustic resonance (Sulzer
1771-1774, Bass). He invokes low interval ratios to explain consonance
(Kirnberger 1771-1779, 1, pp. 23-24; Beach-Thym 1982, p. 38). And,
like Sorge, he invokes the seventh partial (ibid., 2, pp. 68-69; Beach-
Thym 1982, p. 337). But Kirnberger never makes such speculative points
central to his theorizing, even when this leaves him without a systematic
foundation. For instance, Kirnberger (like Marpurg) lists scales and then
builds chords from the notes and intervals contained therein, bypassing
the notion of intervallic roots which Rameau and Lippius before him
found necessary to argue that the root-position form of chords is the origin
of the inversions and not vice versa. Briefly put, the speculative issues that
occupied so much of Rameau’s energy simply did not interest him.

CHORD CLASSIFICATIONS
Because he concentrates on applications, Kirnberger’s writings offer a
pedagogical clarity hitherto unknown in Rameauian harmonic theory.
Right at the beginning of his discussion of chords (Kirnberger 1771-1779,
Chapter 3, and Kirnberger 1773, opening), he presents a table with each
chord type: there are triads, seventh chords, and these two chord types
with added suspensions. Rameau, some of his pupils, and Sorge had
implied such a classification, but never with such clarity, never as clearly
separate categories, and never at the beginning of an exposition of
harmony.

Like Marpurg, Kirnberger also does away with Rameau’s added-sixth
chords. Rameau had needed added-sixth chords to explain stepwise fun-
damental-bass progressions via double emploi. Kirnberger, like Rameau,
believed that the fundamental bass should move primarily by the intervals
in the triad (by fifths and thirds), insisting, for instance, that “the bass of
a true seventh chord must progress up by four steps or down by five”
(Kirnberger 1771-1779, 1, p. 66; Beach-Thym 1982, p. 85). But Kirnber-
ger does not use double emploi to explain apparent root progressions by

The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes

241


=== PAGE 252 ===

242

1
Spas
7 1
far 2
{Fundamental 9
bass:] 3 i °
2 E= =|

Example 9-5. Kirnberger 1771-1779, 1, p. 66; Beach-Thym 1982, p. 85

step, as Rameau did. Nor does he invoke compositional license—Rameau’s
convenient exit from various theoretical difficulties. Instead, Kirnberger
argues that when seventh chords resolve by step, they are really ninth
chords (see Example 9-5). Kirnberger thereby develops his own form of
implied bass progression akin to Rameau’s subposed basses, but differing
in substantial ways. Rameau uses subposition to explain suspended dis-
sonances; Kirnberger uses his added fundamental bass to explain seventh
chords resolving by step. Rameau’s subposition adds a continuo bass
below the fundamental bass; Kirnberger adds a new fundamental bass
below the continuo bass. And Rameau’s subposition is an attempt to
explain the dissonances as parts of a seventh chord; Kirnberger changes
the dissonances of a seventh chord into those of a ninth chord.

SUSPENSIONS: ESSENTIAL AND ACCIDENTAL DISSONANCES
Kirnberger does away with Rameau’s subposed chords to explain suspen-
sions. Instead, he employs the modern notion of nonharmonic-tone sus-
pensions resolving into chord tones without a progression in the funda-
mental bass. He thus differentiates two types of suspended dissonances:
those in which the suspended interval can resolve over the same chord
root and those that require a new chord root to resolve. If a suspension
can resolve into a chord with no other voice motion, it is an incidental
(zufallig) dissonance; if other voices must move and a new harmony
appears along with the resolution, the suspended tone is an essential
(wesentlich) dissonance, a chordal seventh or ninth.

Rameau and his followers noted the relationship between suspensions
and the theory of subposition, and Sorge anticipated Kirnberger’s distinc-
tion and perhaps was the inspiration for it. But no theorist before Kirn-
berger so clearly distinguished between seventh chords and suspensions

6. A similar explanation of the stepwise resolution of a dominant seventh chord appears
in Antoniotto 1760 (p. 98).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 253 ===

and recast subposed ninth and eleventh chords into 9-8 and 4-3
suspensions.

During the nineteenth century, this distinction between incidental and
essential suspensions eventually joined the new perspective on nonsuspen-
sion dissonances, creating the modern distinction between chord tones and
nonharmonic tones. Suspended dissonances were no longer considered a
category entirely separate from all other dissonances, as they had been in
counterpoint and thoroughbass methods. The modern distinction, which
did not appear in a comprehensive fashion until the nineteenth century,
replaced the traditional intervallic approach to dissonances with a chordal
approach.

SUSPENSIONS: TWO TYPES OF 6/4 CHORDS

In addition to differentiating two types of suspended dissonances, Kirn-
berger establishes two separate categories of 6/4 chords: those that rep-
resent the second inversion of a chord (what we call passing, neighboring,
and stationary 6/4 chords) and those that function as suspended tones
over scale-step 5 resolving into the dominant (what we call the cadential
6/4). Rameau had already explained the cadential 6/4 as a pair of suspen-
sions over the dominant in his Code, and it appears in his 1740s manu-
script treatise on fundamental bass. And Charles Levens also included this
interpretation of the cadential 6/4 in his 1743 treatise. But like other tenets
that had appeared in earlier treatises, no one before Kirnberger expressed
the distinction so categorically.

TWO FORMS OF THE DIMINISHED TRIAD

Kirnberger also clearly distinguishes two forms of the diminished triad: a
“consonant” form that can appear in root progressions by fifth (especially
as the supertonic chord in minor keys), and a dissonant form representing
the upper three notes of a dominant seventh chord (a leading-tone triad).
Once again, this distinction was not original with him. Thoroughbass
methods recognized that sometimes it was appropriate to add a sixth td
a diminished fifth (when the diminished triad functions as a leading-tone
chord) and sometimes it was inappropriate to do so (when the diminished
triad functions as a supertonic chord in minor). To facilitate making this
distinction, Georg Philipp Telemann proposes placing an arc (a fermata
without a dot) over a diminished fifth which did not permit a minor sixth
to be played (a supertonic chord in minor), and C. P. E. Bach uses this
notation consistently in his 1762 thoroughbass treatise. Rameau recognizes
a comparable distinction between types of diminished triads in his 1722
Traité (Grant 1976, pp. 120-121). But once again, Kirnberger was the
first to make the distinction so clearly.

The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes

243


=== PAGE 254 ===

244

OTHER INNOVATIONS

Like Rameau, Kirnberger believed that dissonances within harmonies help
prevent premature closure within phrases (Kirnberger 1771-1779, 1,
p. 31; Beach-Thym 1982, p. 45). But Kirnberger stresses more than Ra-
meau how a complete harmonic progression and a cadence are necessary
to establish a key (Kirnberger 1771-1779, 1, Chapter 6). With this larger
conception of key, he is able to avoid the fear that bedeviled Rameau that
a single triad without any dissonances might be a tonic. Kirnberger thus
does not need Rameau’s problematic notions of implied dissonance and
implied chromaticism.

Kirnberger also replaces Rameau’s cumbersome terminology of major
and minor dissonances for the two sensitive notes in a dominant-seventh
chord. He calls these notes leading tones, with scale-step 7 as an apparent
dissonance (scheinbaren Dissonanz; Kirnberger c. 1781, pp. 42—43).

Kirnberger also explains more clearly than earlier theorists the distinc-
tion between what we call nowadays local tonicizations (secondary dom-
inants) and larger changes of keys, as well as the difference between passing
through keys and fully establishing a new key, which requires a cadence
to confirm the new tonic (Kirnberger 1771-1779, 1, pp. 110, 120, Beach-
Thym 1982, pp. 128, 136; Sulzer 1771-1774, Ausweichung). But unlike
other areas listed above, Kirnberger does not introduce any clear term to
refer to this distinction.

With a more secure basis for evaluating consonant and dissonant chords
and chromaticism, Kirnberger has been credited with introducing the no-
tion of passing progressions, in which several chords are viewed as con-
necting more fundamental harmonies. David Beach cites two passages in
Example 9-6, a conjunct descending bass against a sustained chord, and
a moving bass against a sustained upper-voice tone. Here Kirnberger was
no innovator. His passing progressions are only apparent harmonies,
merely the result of long nonharmonic tones. Similar passing dissonances
against a sustained chord occur in virtually every extensive thoroughbass
treatise of the century (as well as in Rameau 1737, Ex. 28). But in addition,
some of Kirnberger’s predecessors treat not only such extended disso-
nances but also consonant chords and functional progressions as passing
chords. Heinichen discusses how several consonant and dissonant har-
monies pass between two structural chords (Example 3-22). Rameau im-
plies the notion of passing harmonies (Example 4-18). And Nichelmann
uses a variety of interpolated progressions (passing chords, neighboring
chords, repeated chords, tonicizing chords) to extend basic harmonies
(Example 8-13). Recurring appearances of some form of the notion of
passing harmonies, whether involving apparently functional harmonies or
merely extended passing tones, most likely reflect the currency of this
notion throughout the eighteenth-century. Explicit discussions probably

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 255 ===

Example 9-6. Kirnberger 1771-1779, I, pp. 50-51, 86;
Beach-Thym 1982, pp. 72-73, 104

arose so rarely only because the notion essentially lies outside the formal
theoretical traditions of the time, whether counterpoint, thoroughbass, or
harmony.

Besides all the innovative aspects of harmonic theory and all the clari-
fications of terminology and concepts just outlined, Kirnberger’s Kunst
des reinen Satzes is also important for the successful linkage of that theory
with the notion that the strict style is the basis of free composition.
Kirnberger thereby unites the power of harmonic explanations with the
teaching traditions associated with the very best treatises on thoroughbass
and composition (Niedt, Heinichen, C. P. E. Bach) as well as strict coun-
terpoint (Fux). As in the writings of Bernhard, Heinichen, and Niedt,
Kirnberger repeatedly shows how complex compositional surfaces are
based on simpler underlying structures (Kirnberger 1771-1779, 1, Preface
and p. 224; Beach-Thym, pp. 234-235).

His pedagogical clarity also emerges in the well-organized discussion of
melodic harmonization in Chapter 1 of the second volume. He teaches
how to harmonize a melody with tonic, dominant, and subdominant
chords, then how to add other chords, and finally how to apply chroma-
ticism to the simple structure, closing his discussion with a comparison of
twenty-six different harmonizations of the same chorale melody. The man-
ner of presentation is comparable to that of modern harmony texts.”
Kirnberger also relates harmonic progressions to phrase structure more

7. Kirnberger’s procedure and format may have been the model for a similar multiple
harmonization exercise on an early Beethoven sketchbook leaf (Kramer 1975, pp. 76-82).

The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes

245


=== PAGE 256 ===

Allegro

246

ffpcsettet oe
E

Dj

Example 9-7. Kirnberger’s Allegro, mm. 1-6, with Marpurg’s analysis

clearly than most of his predecessors (especially Kirnberger 1771-1779,
1, Chapter 10).

To be sure, Kirnberger was distinctly old-fashioned in some important
respects, especially his wariness about common dissonance usages. His
conservatism may have contributed to the absence of direct influence on
many later theorists. Yet his Kunst des reinen Satzes, by presenting har-
monic theory without many of the Rameauian trappings that seem irrel-
evant to modern theorists, stands alongside Mozart’s pedagogical records
and Koch’s treatise in representing the manner in which the various tra-
ditions of eighteenth century theory could be combined in a comprehensive

pedagogy.

The Disputes between Marpurg and Kirnberger

The Berlin theorists engaged in two public disputes, one in 1759, the other
in the mid-1770s. The first began with a characteristically harsh pseudon-
ymous attack by Marpurg on an anonymous, unpublished two-voiced
fugue (Marpurg 1759-1763, pp. 41-47). Kirnberger soon published the
fugue, claimed it as his own, and defended it against Marpurg’s charges
(Allegro fiir das Clavier allein, 1759). Marpurg rejoined with an extensive
rebuttal (Marpurg 1759-1763, pp. 175-220; the dispute is thoroughly
surveyed in Serwer 1970).

Marpurg’s critique mostly accuses Kirnberger of lacking compositional
skill. But substantial theoretical issues also arise. Of particular significance
is the recognition of chordal inversions and how chords and their inver-
sions are relevant to two-part textures. Marpurg asserts that the chords
implied in the fugue’s exposition are those labeled below the score in
Example 9-7. He finds the circled notes objectionable because each is the
fifth of a triad and thus would produce an unacceptable 6/4 chord on the
beat if the parts were inverted. Traditional rules for invertible counterpoint
at the octave forbid a fifth in such circumstances because inversion pro-
duces an improper fourth. Marpurg, who six years earlier published his
treatise on fugue, recasts this rule from intervallic into chordal terms, in

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 257 ===

Example 9-8. J. S. Bach, Fugue in F major, Well Tempered Clavier 2

effect banning not the interval of a fifth but the fifth of a chord from such
positions in invertible counterpoint.

In his response, Kirnberger fails to understand this criticism, merely
citing instances of thirds and sixths in fugues by well-known composers,
among them the J. S. Bach passage in Example 9-8. Marpurg countered
that all these thirds and sixths involve roots and thirds of triads, but never
fifths of triads (see Example 9-9). To be sure, there are examples of two-
voice invertible counterpoint where J. S. Bach does place the fifth of a
triad in an upper voice on a strong beat, such as in the Fugue in D minor
from the first volume (in which the resulting 6/4 chord is treated appro-
priately when it occurs later in the fugue, as shown in Example 9-10). But
Kirnberger does not tender any of these.

It is surprising that Kirnberger seems to have been unable to understand
how full harmonies are to be found in a two-voiced texture, since a dozen

Example 9-10. J. S. Bach, Fugue in D minor, Well-Tempered Clavier 1

The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes


=== PAGE 258 ===

248

Example 9-11. J. S. Bach, Fugue in B minor, Well-Tempered Clavier 1
as analyzed in Kirnberger 1773 (subject only)

years later, he argues in Die Kunst des reinen Satzes that two-voiced
counterpoint is based on a four-part texture. And Die wahren Grundsdtze
(1773) concludes with fundamental-bass analyses of two compositions
from the Well-Tempered in which Kirnberger even provides a full-textured
harmonic analysis of the unaccompanied fugue subject. A portion of one
appears in Example 9-11.8 Under the score is a full-voiced hypothetical
realization of the fugal texture, a fundamental bass with all suspended
dissonances, and a fundamental bass with only essential dissonances.
Kirnberger’s seeming failure in 1759 to perceive chords in two-part
writing juxtaposed with this later analysis and his later insistence that
two-part writing is based on chords raises the question of when Kirnberger
developed his harmonic theories. Did Kirnberger did not learn harmonic
theory until after 1759? If so, did Kirnberger study Rameau’s writings
more closely than has hitherto been thought by any scholar, or did Kirn-
berger work with some musician conversant with Rameau’s theories? (We
can exclude Marpurg as his tutor because of their different interpretations
of Rameauian theory and because Marpurg surely would have claimed
Kirnberger as a pupil if this had been the case.) Or did Kirnberger under-

8. The opening of this analysis appears in Beach 1974, pp. 291-293. Beach accepts

Schulz’s claim that Die wahren Grundsdtze was not written by Kirnberger and argues that
“the analyses were done under (Kirnberger’s] supervision by his student, J. A. P. Schulz.”

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 259 ===

@)
4

Example 9-12. An alternative analysis of the preceding example

stand the issue in 1759 but fail to perceive that it was the point of
Marpurg’s criticism? The issue remains puzzling.

The analysis of Bach’s Fugue in B minor also illustrates how Kirnberger’s
distinction between incidental and essential dissonances hampers his ability
to perceive structures beyond the immediate foreground. When Kirnberger
analyzes incidental dissonances, he can omit these tones to find a structural
frame at a deeper level. In the first half of measure 2, for instance, he
omits E and C and hears a single harmony: a B-triad becoming a B-
dominant seventh chord on the lowest staff. But in the sequentially parallel
second half of that measure, he felt bound to consider the implied B of
his realization as an essential dissonance and to maintain two harmonies.
Likewise, in the second half of the first measure, his perception that the B
in the subject is a chord seventh requires him to retain eighth-note har-
monic rhythm even in the lowest fundamental bass. Thus an analysis like
the one shown in Example 9-12, which reduces all accented eighths that
resolve by semitone (whether they are essential or incidental in Kirnber-
ger’s terms), was beyond him.

In the 1759 dispute, Kirnberger also fails to understand Marpurg’s
criticism of larger aspects of his fugue. Marpurg complains that there is
insufficient tonal variety in the opening. There are three consecutive fugal
expositions in the tonic (mm. 1, 12, and 24), all of which begin with the
subject in the upper voice in the same register. Such repetitions violate
recommendations common in fugue manuals favoring variety of keys (or
modal placement) and voice placement of fugue-subject entries. Kirnberger
counters that such repetitions are not problematic, noting that J. S. Bach’s
Fugue in C-minor from the Well-Tempered Clavier 1 presents the subject
three times in the tonic. Marpurg points out that Bach’s three statements
are spread over the entire fugue and furthermore that the subject appears
in different fugal voices. In contrast to Marpurg, Kirnberger seems unable
to grasp either the larger tonal structure of the work or the variety that
Bach’s fugue offers.

The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes

249


=== PAGE 260 ===

250

;

'
LT VL

7

'

Example 9-13. Kirnberger 1773, Supplement; Marpurg 1776, Fig. 70.
Marpurg omits the treble realization.

The second dispute became public when Marpurg appended a critique
of Kirnberger’s Die wahren Grundsdtze and Die Kunst des reinen Satzes
to his 1776 Versuch tiber die musikalische Temperatur. But it apparently
had been simmering for a while. According to Marpurg, Kirnberger visited
him often while preparing Die wabren Grundsdtze for publication, boast-
ing that this work would “drive the Rameauists into a corner” (Marpurg
1776, p. iii). And although Kirnberger angrily denies that he begged
Marpurg to withhold a critique for a while so as “not to ruin sales of his
Grundsatze” (ibid., p. iv), he acknowledges that the two engaged in the-
oretical discussions “from time to time” during this period (Kirnberger
1771-1779, 2, pp. 181-182).

The use of fundamental bass lies at the heart of the debate. As quoted
above, Marpurg insists that a fundamental bass reflect the actual notes in
a chord and not be altered to interpret a progression. For him, a funda-
mental bass that has notes not present in the music or that omits chords
present in the music is like a table of contents that has more or fewer
chapters than actually occur in a book (p. 277). He complains that Kirn-
berger often inserts a note not in the score into the fundamental bass in
order to turn a step progression into a fifth progression, as on the second
beat in Example 9-13.

Rameau would have agreed with Kirnberger’s fundamental bass but
would have explained it somewhat differently. For Rameau, the second
chord, because it progresses by fifth, would have an implied seventh (as
shown in Example 9-14). If the first chord had been a G triad, Rameau
would again have insisted that the second chord contains an implied
dissonance and would have used double emploi to explain the progression.

In all such examples, Marpurg rejects Rameau’s belief that the funda-
mental bass should explain progressions. Kirnberger, like Rameau, uses
the fundamental bass to interpret the progression.

Marpurg also rejects Kirnberger’s addition of connecting chords not

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 261 ===

[Fundamental bass:]
7 4

Example 9-15. Kirnberger 1773, pp. 38-39 (Beach and Thym 1979, pp. 195-196);
Marpurg 1776, Fig. 65. Marpurg omits the treble.

present in the music, as in Example 9-15. Kirnberger says the “fundamen-
tal harmony is to be understood” because it is necessary to explain the
resolution of the seventh in the first chord.? Marpurg agrees that the
progression arises from the omission of a chord but denies this has any-
thing to do with fundamental bass. He also chides Kirnberger for saying
that “via the omission of the resolution, the thread of the natural pro-
gression is not torn” (Kirnberger 1773, p. 43). If such gaps were natural,
Marpurg asks, “why is it taught that dissonances must be resolved
properly?” (Marpurg 1776, p. 278).

On other matters, Marpurg upholds Rameau’s interpretations against
Kirnberger’s innovations. He challenges Kirnberger’s distinction between
incidental and essential dissonances, arguing that the term incidental
should refer to those dissonances that occur in a melodic part, such as
Fux’s passing and changing notes. These are not essential notes because
they do not affect the harmony. All types of suspensions, however, should
be considered essential because they affect both melody and harmony.
With this stance, Marpurg upholds a traditional thoroughbass perspective,

g. A nearly identical progression and explanation, though without a notated fundamental
bass, appears in Kirnberger 1771-1779, 1, p. 85; Beach and Thym 1982, p. 103.

The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes

251


=== PAGE 262 ===

252

y iasa a aa a

Example 9-16. Marpurg 1776, Figs. 101, 102

asserting that suspensions create a new harmony, which is why they are
notated in thoroughbass figures. That is why they are best explained by
subposition. If incidental dissonances were merely notes resolving into
chord tones, Marpurg asks why the suspensions shown in Example 9-16
would not be acceptable. Marpurg, like Rameau, insists that only knowing
the origin of suspensions via subposition will prevent such “impure
examples.”

Marpurg and Kirnberger also disagree over what harmonies belong
within a key. Marpurg refuses to recognize Kirnberger’s notion of chro-
maticism within a key (what we call secondary or tonicizing dominants),
rejecting his contention that the progression shown in Example 9-17 is
within the key of C major. Marpurg contrasts this example with that in
Example 9-18, where Kirnberger argues that the consecutive triads imply
a sequence of keys. Marpurg ridicules the notion that a chromatic pro-
gression can be in one key, while a progression with only white-key notes
offers tonal ambiguity. In both cases, Kirnberger upholds Rameau’s inter-
pretation. Kirnberger’s notion of chromaticism within a key extends Ra-
meau’s suggestion discussed in connection with Example 4-21. And Kirn-
berger’s interpretation of a simple sequence of first-inversion triads recalls
Rameau’s comparable trouble with similar progressions because he bans
stepwise fundamental-bass progressions (Example 4-17 and Appendix 1).

The dispute also shows how even in the eighteenth century there were
questions about the origin of commonly accepted tenets. Kirnberger argues
that Rameau did not discover chordal inversion. This, of course, is true.

aS peste te i
instead of

4 6 2 é 8 7
2S

Example 9-17. Kirnberger 1771-1779, 1, p. 102 (Beach and Thym 1982, p. 120;
Marpurg 1776, Fig. 131. Marpurg cites only the upper staff,
and ends the example as shown.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 263 ===

PRL
Th
ie

BLL]
mr
|
ton

Fundamental bass:
By et eS

Example 9-18. Kirnberger 1773, p. 45 (Beach and Thym 1979, p. 200);
Marpurg 1776, Figs. 132, 134. Marpurg cites only the bass.

But instead of citing any works prior to 1722 that explain inverted chords,
Kirnberger lamely insists that inversional thinking was implicit in double
counterpoint. Marpurg opposes this, arguing that Rameau did invent
chordal inversion. He says he scoured treatises published before 1722 by
Artusi, Berardi, Bononcini, Brossard, Fux, Glarean, Heinichen, Kircher,
Mersenne, Zarlino, and others and found no mention of chord inversions
(Marpurg 1776, pp. 271-272; he apparently overlooked Fux’s explanation
of triadic inversion).

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE DISPUTE

It is clear from this survey that it distorts the dispute to characterize the
issues debated by Marpurg and Kirnberger in terms of C. P. E. Bach’s
Rameau versus anti-Rameau remark. It is an even greater distortion to
equate “Rameau vs. anti-Rameau” with a vertical, point-to-point perspec-
tive on harmony and voice leading versus a linear one, as some modern
historians have done. Kirnberger supports Rameau’s interpretive role for
fundamental bass, while Marpurg argues that chordal structure, not chord
progressions, should determine chordal roots. Marpurg supports Rameau’s
subposed bass, while Kirnberger turns triads into seventh chords and
seventh chords into ninth chords in order to explain some progressions.
If C. P, E. Bach’s anti-Rameau remark supports Kirnberger’s positions,
should we interpret it to mean that Bach and his father agreed that
fundamental bass should play an interpretive role and that seventh chords
should be turned into ninth chords in stepwise root progressions, but did

The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes

253


=== PAGE 264 ===

254

not believe that the root should be determined by the notes present in a
chord and did not believe in subposed chords?

If the dispute does not represent a showdown between vertical and
linear views of musical structure, one may properly ask what all the heat
and sloganeering was about. An answer to this lies in ignorance of Ra-
meau’s actual writings as well as in nationalistic and philosophical issues
not directly related to questions of musical structure.

Marpurg is probably correct when he claims that he was the first to
make Rameau’s name widely known in Germany (Marpurg 1776, p. 229).
But he is wrong if he means to equate knowledge of Rameau’s name with
knowledge of Rameau’s ideas. Marpurg claims that the appearance of
fundamental bass in his 1757 D’Alembert translation and in his dispute
with Sorge around 1760 was controversial because the concept was hith-
erto unknown in Germany. But Nichelmann’s earlier use of fundamental
bass in 1755 had aroused no questions. Hahn and Daube had incorporated
many tenets of Rameau’s harmonic theories into their thoroughbass trea-
tises of 1751 and 1756 without any fanfare. Rameauian ideas appeared
in Heinichen’s 1728 and Kellner’s 1732 thoroughbass treatises. And Schré-
ter had studied Rameau’s Traité in Jena as early as 1724.

Many of Rameau’s ideas had become so pervasive that German musi-
cians, who did not read Rameau’s works directly, did not realize that they
were the core of Rameau’s theories. Quite possibly, Mattheson’s recurring
anti-Rameau remarks had given rise to a perception of Rameau’s theories
quite different from the Rameauian ideas in circulation. When Marpurg
began espousing his own ideas as those of Rameau, and when he chal-
lenged other theorists from Sorge to Kirnberger, not a single German
musician seems to have known Rameau’s works well enough to argue that
Marpurg had distorted the Frenchman’s ideas.

There are several published indications of confusion over what Rameau
represented. \s noted in Chapter 8, Lohlein simply replaced Sorge’s name
with Rameau’s between the 1765 and 1779 editions of his Clavier-Schule,
leaving the theoretical contents unchanged. Apparently what he thought
derived from Sorge in 1765 he later believed derived from Rameau. And
Scheibe, after criticizing Rameau’s theories in his Ueber die Musikalische
Composition (1773), refers to the musical articles in Sulzer’s recently
published Allgemeine Theorie, complaining that “the author of the musical
articles in this good work in most articles seems to have sworn an oath
to D’Alembert’s or Rameau’s flag” (p. 383). There seems to be no reaction
from Kirnberger or Schulz to Scheibe’s assumption that their views echo
Rameau.

Kirnberger claimed that his writings arose from the desire to reduce J.
S. Bach’s teaching to basic principles (Kirnberger 1782, pp. 4-5). What
aspects of Bach’s teachings are represented? David Beach argues that it

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 265 ===

was only the ordering of materials—beginning with four-part writing and
gradually progressing to free composition (Beach-Thym 1982, pp. xvi-—
xvii). Certainly these are the aspects of Johann Sebastian’s teaching de-
scribed in C. P. E. Bach’s letter of 1775 to assist Forkel in preparing his
biography of Johann Sebastian (David and Mendel 1966, p. 279). There isno
evidence that J. S. Bach knew of or taught any form of fundamental bass,
the division of suspensions into essential and incidental, or any other
specific tenets of Kirnberger’s. But the similarities among treatment of
fundamental bass in the writings of Nichelmann and Kirnberger (especially
the use of fundamental bass to interpret progressions and their implicit
assumption that fundamental-bass notation was common knowledge) and
their common background in the Bach circle in Leipzig in the 1730s and
17408 suggest a common source for their fundamental-bass ideas. It will
take further research, possibly into any extant manuscript teaching ma-
terials from the period, to determine the source of their common ideas.

In evaluating the hostility to Rameau’s name by Kirnberger and others
who adopted various of Rameau’s tenets, Cecil Grant calls attention to
philosophical attitudes of the time (Grant 1976, pp. 16-34). Much of the
practical side of Kirnberger’s theory is based on Rameau, but the outlook
of the two theorists was different and what they understood as a theory
was different. Rameau was perceived in Germany as a representative of
the French Enlightenment. There was considerable French influence at the
court of Frederick the Great, including extended visits by Voltaire,
D’Alembert, and other leading French figures. This inspired both nation-
alistic impulses (already adumbrated in music theory in Mattheson’s anti-
French and anti-Jesuit critiques of Rameau as well as in Sorge’s reference
to “Mr. Marpourg” who wished to bring Rameau’s ideas to “our Ger-
many”; Sorge 1767, dedication) and the pietism of the German Counter-
Enlightenment. Sulzer, organizer of the Allgemeine Theorie der Schénen
Kiinste, who encouraged Kirnberger to write Die Kunst des reinen Satzes
(Schulz 1800, Beach-Thym 1982, p. xi), had studied with Johann Jakob
Breitinger (1701-1776), a strenuous opponent of French influence in the
arts and philosophy. It is quite possible that C. P. E. Bach’s statement
rejecting Rameau’s influence on himself and his late father was more a
critique of French influence and a rejection of the scientific side of Ra-
meau’s writings than of any specific tenets in the Kirnberger-Marpurg
dispute. The contents of C. P. E.’s entire letter, if it still exists, would help
reveal the context of the slogan Kirnberger cites.

Some previous interpretations of the Kirnberger-Marpurg disputes and

10. If it still exists, a lost treatise on harmony by W. F. Bach might provide clues; there
was an announcement of the imminent publication of his Abhandlung vom harmonischen
Dreiklang (c. 1754) in the spring of 1759, but the work never appeared.

The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes

255


=== PAGE 266 ===

256

of other aspects of eighteenth-century theory use theorists from the past
as surrogates for twentieth-century theoretical battles. But because their
perspective was quite different from ours, eighteenth-century musicians
view various issues quite differently than we do. On numerous issues,
theorists can be aligned with one another in ways that cut across modern
differentiations. Some modern theorists align thoroughbass writers and
contrapuntalists against supporters of harmonic theory. But C. P. E. Bach,
apparently reflecting his father’s views, sees thoroughbass and counter-
point as traditions opposed to one another, relating how J. S. Bach’s
teaching “omitted all the dry species of counterpoint that were given by
Fux and others” (David and Mendel 1966, p. 279). Likewise, Fux builds his
composition method from species counterpoint to oppose thoroughbass
methods. J. S$. Bach, Rameau, and Kirnberger argue that composition
students should begin with four-voiced writing, while Fux and Marpurg
insist on beginning with two voices. Marpurg sees no conflict in drawing
upon the writings of both Rameau and C. P. E. Bach, just as W. A. Mozart
incorporates both fundamental bass and Fuxian counterpoint (interpreted
as expressing harmonies) into his teachings. Some fundamental-bass the-
orists imply the notion of passing harmonies (Rameau, Nichelmann), while
contrapuntal and thoroughbass writers often insist that each verticality is
a separate entity. Contrapuntalists like Fux insist on immediate resolution
of linear dissonances, while some fundamental-bass theorists discuss po-
lyphonic melodies with multiple voice-leading strands (Gianotti 1759, Part
2, Chapter 8). Padre Martini, who urges training in the polyphonic stile
antico, interprets harmonies in that music according to Rameauian fun-
damental bass.

Clearly, the sharp separations some scholars draw between different
theoretical traditions in the eighteenth century do not stand up to scrutiny.
Perhaps the best indication of the unity perceived among various ap-
proaches during the latter part of the century—or at least of the consensus
that each theoretical school had something important to contribute and
that none had a monopoly on musical truth—is Leopold Mozart’s refer-
ence to books by C. P. E. Bach, D’Alembert, Fux, Marpurg, Mattheson,
Rameau, Riepel, Spiess, Scheibe, and Tosi-Agricola as sources of “sound
stuff” (Anderson 1966, letter of June 11, 1778). Similarly, as Nottebohm
pointed out over a century ago, the teaching materials Beethoven used as
a student in the 1780s and early 1790s include species counterpoint, tra-
ditional thoroughbass methods, thoroughbass chords organized by chord
types as found in Kirnberger’s Kunst des reinen Satzes, and many of
Marpurg’s harmonic theories (including chords by subposition to explain
suspensions), probably as presented in Tiirk 1791 (Nottebohm 1872,

PP. 154-203).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 267 ===

Harmonic Theory from the 1770s

This survey of Kirnberger and Marpurg completes this history of the
contrapuntal, thoroughbass, and harmonic traditions as they evolved and
interacted during the eighteenth century. By the 1770s, the contents of
most contrapuntal and thoroughbass traditions had been absorbed by the
harmonic approach. Whatever differences of opinion remained over im-
portant issues—and there were many—theorists agreed that chords were
the building blocks of musical structure and that both the structure of
chords and progressions from one to another were best understood in
terms of their root movements. Marpurg and Kirnberger had provided the
basis for understanding all the different types of nonharmonic tones in
terms of a harmonic theory. As a result, writers with outlooks on musical
style and pedagogy as different as those of Albrechtsberger, Kirnberger,
Martini, and Marpurg, could agree on many essentials of musical
structure. :

The only exceptions to this consensus are some keyboard-instruction or
thoroughbass manuals designed for amateurs or clearly based on earlier
models. One such work is the Unterricht im Generalbass Spielen (1773)
by Georg Michael Telemann (1748-1831), the grandson of the famous
composer. Although the Vorbericht suggests that Telemann wished to
modernize outdated thoroughbass rules, the contents suggest otherwise.
Yet even in this work which presents materials much like pre-Rameau
treatises, Telemann praises the “learned” Sorge’s Vorgemach, Marpurg’s
“beloved” Handbuch to teach harmony, and C. P. E. Bach’s “beautiful”
Versuch for accompaniment, though he believes the last work is too
learned for beginners (p. 10)."!

What remains to be discussed is the growing awareness of musical
phrasing and form during the eighteenth century, as well as the role of
melodic construction in shaping the new music of the Classical era. This
approach appears full-blown in Joseph Riepel’s treatises of the 1750s and
1760s. Heinrich Christoph Koch then wedded this approach with har-
monic theory in the 1780s, providing a new comprehensive vision of
musical structure in his treatise of the mid-1780s. Riepel and Koch are
the subjects of Chapters ro and 11.

11. Page 11 of this book shares with p. xi of Vallotti 1779 the odd distinction of having
a footnote to a footnote!

The Marpurg-Kirnberger Disputes

257


=== PAGE 268 ===

CHAPTER TEN

CE OK SP

Riepel on Melody and Phrases

Even beyond these matters, composition is an inexhaustible sea.

The concluding sentence of each
chapter of Riepel’s Anfangsgriinde

AS DESCRIBED in the preceding chapters, much of eighteenth-century
theory, whether cast as species counterpoint, thoroughbass, or the study
of harmony, addresses age-old questions: How do voices combine to form
acceptable harmonies? What are the constraints on voice leading and the
successions of harmonies? How must dissonances be treated? And how
are these matters best explained? This agenda occupied much of the energy
of theorists throughout the century.

While many theorists ardently debated these issues of chord definition
and classification, dissonance classification, and the nature of harmonic
continuity, essential elements of musical style were undergoing a profound
transformation. By the middle of the century new musical issues demanded
attention—issues that were not adequately addressed by any pre-existent
approach. These issues primarily concerned melody and the structure of
musical compositions.

These concerns had not been ignored by earlier theorists. In the early
years of the century, Friedrich Erhard Niedt describes a close bond between
thoroughbass practice and composition that is implicit in many thorough-
bass treatises. He shows how rhythmicizing and expanding thoroughbass
progressions could create a wide range of compositions. But except when
he treats a few aspects of standardized dance movements, Niedt’s approach
does not directly address the nature of the resulting melodic structures,
their motives, their articulation into phrases and phrase subdivisions, and
the way phrases connect with one another to form larger musical struc-


=== PAGE 269 ===

tures. On these matters of melody and phrase structure, theorists were
largely silent.

A major reason for this silence is that these topics were not as relevant
to compositional styles at the turn of the eighteenth century as they soon
became in the galant styles. Yet despite the growing prominence of artic-
ulated melodic phrases and periods in an increasing amount of contem-
porary music, only three theorists between the 1730s and the 1780s pub-
lished anything substantial on melodic structure and phrase articulations.
For whatever reasons, all were German: Johann Mattheson, Johann Rie-
pel, and Heinrich Christoph Koch.!

Mattheson was hailed by his contemporaries for being the first to publish
a book on melody: his Kern melodischer Wissenschaft of 1737, whose
contents Mattheson incorporated into Der vollkommene Capellmeister of
1739. As described in Chapter 6, Mattheson discussed many important
aspects of melodic construction. But much of his treatment deals only
superficially if at all with those aspects that were important to later mu-
sicians. And, as several historians have commented, when Mattheson ap-
plies the jargon of rhetoric to musical structures, the reader often ends up
learning more about Classical oratory than about music.

Little more than a decade after Mattheson’s Vollkommene Capellmeis-
ter, the first of a series of works by Joseph Riepel appeared, reflecting a
wholly new approach to melodic and compositional structure. Riepel
placed melody and phrasing at the heart of musical structure in formula-
tions that remained the sole detailed published discussion of these topics
for three decades.

Joseph Riepel

Riepel (1709-1782) apparently began his formal musical studies past the
age of thirty. In the early 1740s, living in Dresden, he probably studied
with the composer Jan Dismas Zelenka (1679-1745), a pupil of Fux and
an assistant to Heinichen toward the end of the latter’s life. By 1751,
Riepel had settled in Regensburg, where he remained as violinist, com-
poser, and author.? His major published work is a series of five chapters
published one at a time between 1752 and 1768 under the general title

1. The discussions of melody and phrasing in the works of Kirnberger and Marpurg
(also Germans) are substantially more limited and do not address the comprehensive agendas
set by Riepel and Koch. The primary discussion of melody and phrasing in the works of
Johann Friedrich Daube was not published until 1797, even though it was probably written
in the 1770s.

2. Twittenhoff 1935 evaluates Riepel’s career as composer and performer in Regensburg,
including his angry reply to a negative assessment by Charles Burney (pp. 29-32).

Riepel on Melody and Phrases

259


=== PAGE 270 ===

260

Anfangsgriinde zur musicalischen Setzkunst (Rudiments of Musical
Composition):

Chapter 1: De rhythmopoeia, oder von der Tactordnung (1752)
Chapter 2: Grundregeln zur Tonordnung insgemein (1755)

Chapter 3: Griindliche Erklarung der Tonordnung insbesondere (1757)
Chapter 4: Erlduterung der betriiglichen Tonordnung (1765)

Chapter 5: Unentbehrliche Anmerkungen zum Contrapunct (1768)

One additional chapter, entitled Bafshliissel, was published posthumously
in 1786, edited by Johann Kaspar Schubarth (1756-1810), Riepel’s pupil
and successor in Regensburg. Several other chapters remain in manuscript
(summarized in Twittenhoff 1935). It is not clear whether Riepel substan-
tially completed the Anfangsgriinde by the early 1750s and then published
the chapters one at a time, or whether he wrote the chapters separately as
they were published. The five chapters published by Riepel are in dialogue
format featuring a student (Discantista) and teacher (Praeceptor), in ob-
vious imitation of Fux’s Gradus.3

Although he resided in Regensburg (not one of the main musical centers
in Germany) while writing and publishing his Anfangsgriinde, Riepel kept
abreast of the latest writings in both German and French. For instance, in
1752 he refers to Rameau’s recent Démonstration of 1750 (p. 75). And
in 1755 he includes a critique of this treatise (p. 53) and also refers to the
first part of C. P. E. Bach’s Versuch of 1752 and Marpurg’s Abhandlung
von der Fuge of 1753-1754 (p. 129).

Despite his knowledge of a wide range of contemporary treatises—or
perhaps precisely because of this knowledge—Riepel’s Anfangsgriinde is
like no other work of its time. Riepel had little patience for the formalities
of most of the published treatises of the day. He proudly proclaims his
intention to write “ABCs for those who wish to comprehend the rules of
composition, not for those who know how to dictate laws” (Riepel 1752,

3. There are several important studies of Riepel. Twittenhoff 1935 includes a valuable
summary of the contents of each of his works. Schwarzmaier 1936, more comprehensive
and more cognizant of Riepel’s contemporaries than Twittenhoff, repeatedly compares
Riepel’s ideas to those of Koch, Marpurg, and Kirnberger and also uses passages by Haydn,
Mozart, and Beethoven to illustrate various points. But Schwarzmaier insists on treating
Riepel’s teachings as a study of musical form in the nineteenth-century sense. And by
applying Riepel’s ideas directly to compositions from later in the Classical period, Schwarz-
maier seems to ignore the major changes in style between the 1750s and the end of the
century. Feil 1955 properly sees Riepel’s works as a study of composition, not form. Reed
1983 is the only thorough summary of Riepel’s ideas in English. Baker 1975 relates many
of Koch’s ideas to similar formulations of Riepel. Sisman 1982 demonstrates how Riepel’s
theories apply most particularly to music prior to and around 1750. In addition, Ratner
1980 contains numerous references to Riepel’s works.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 271 ===

preface). He mocks what he regards as mathematical approaches to com-
position—nowhere in any of his published writings are there formal de-
rivations of intervals, chords, and the like. (Riepel’s mathematical predi-
lections lie with permutations; he applies the ars combinatoria to such
things as patterns of notes and rhythms, bowings, orderings of keys, and
even harmonic combinations of notes, as discussed in Chapter 8). He
disdains the pretensions of other theorists, even calling attention to the
small size of his name on the title page of Chapter 1 and that he displays
no self-portrait as a frontispiece (although the font in which his name is
set on the title page does increase in size chapter by chapter!).

In line with his rejection of theoretical formalities, he opens the very
first page of Chapter 1 with a discussion of how to compose a minuet.
The student boldly offers a minuet, boasting that “it’s no great honor to
compose one,” thereby launching an extensive discussion of its problems
and possible emendations. Riepel uses this pedagogical method—intro-
ducing compositions and emending them—throughout all the chapters.

Melody and Phrasing

Riepel’s primary concern is melody, especially the articulation and joining
of phrases. He rejects any and all studies of harmony or voice leading that
have not first taught melody in the sense of melodic articulations and
phrase structures: “Whoever wishes to build houses must first obtain the
needed materials. For without knowledge of melody nothing can be ac-
complished with a bass” (Riepel 1768, p. 1). This criticism eschews the
entire thoroughbass tradition of compositional instruction, all Rameauian
harmony, and even the study of counterpoint. And it reflects a change in
the role of the bass from its determining role in earlier music to its more
supportive status in the newer styles around the middle of the century.
Not until Chapter 5, published in 1768, does Riepel explain how to set a
bass to a melody.

Unfortunately, Riepel’s complaint that other methods put the cart before
the horse can be applied to his own approach as well. Most of his copious
examples are single-line articulated melodies. (Many other examples are
in string quartet format; keyboard examples appears only occasionally.)
These one-line melodic examples are always built on a clearly implied
harmonic foundation, and he introduces many harmonic notions about
cadences and keys long before he ever discusses harmony. Surely a student
using the Anfangsgriinde without prior grounding in thoroughbass, har-
mony, or counterpoint would encounter great difficulties writing in the
style of Riepel’s clearly articulated melodies.

Riepel deals with many aspects of melody: phrase length, cadential
orientation, melodic contour, motives and motivic unity, common melodic

Riepel on Melody and Phrases

261


=== PAGE 272 ===

262

shapes, rhythmic continuity, expansions and contractions of phrases, and
the connection of phrases to one another. But he does not present com-
prehensive discussions of these and other issues (as Koch was to do some
decades later). Rather, Riepel raises issues somewhat haphazardly as they
arise in his extensive emendation and recomposition of examples. This
discursiveness is to a large degree the result of the dialogue format. Much
as in Fux’s classic Gradus, it lends a welcome informality, heightened here
by Riepel’s colorful language. But whereas Fux almost always remained
close to the topic at hand, Riepel often seems to ramble, explaining flute
fingerings within a discussion of melodic ornamentation, and so forth.

Riepel classifies a phrase (Absatz) according to its length and cadential
orientation. He indicates the length of a phrase by counting the number
of measures it contains (Zweyer, Dreyer, Vierer, Ftinfer, etc., through nine-
measure units). Although he argues for the primacy of four-measure
phrases, he also discusses extensively how phrases of other lengths may
be used. He indicates the cadential orientation of a phrase by a prefix and
an analytical symbol placed at the phrase ending in musical examples. A
fundamental phrase (Grundabsatz) ends on the tonic, labeled with a black
square. An altered phrase (Aenderungsabsatz) ends on the dominant, la-
beled with a white square (Riepel 1755, pp. 36ff.). Riepel extends his
classification of phrases to include important changes of key; thus an
altered phrase after a change of key to the dominant is a fifth altered
phrase (Quint-Aenderungs-Absatz), sometimes labeled by a + (Riepel
1755, p. 64). A phrase may have more than one segment (Einschnitt;
Riepel 1755, pp. 52ff.). Like phrases, segments also are differentiated
according to the harmonic orientation of their ending.

Throughout the chapters, Riepel shows how phrases can be transformed
by changing their endings, their contour, their motives, their meter, their
ornamentation, their connection to preceding and following phrases, by
partial or complete repetition (Wiederhdlung), by iteration of the cadence
(Verdoppelung), by an extension at the end of a phrase (Verlangerung),
by expansion of material within a phrase (Ausdadhnung), by abbreviation
(Verkiirzung), by the insertion of material within a phrase (Einschiebel),
and so forth (Riepel 1755, p. 71, and passim). He begins with a minuet
in Chapter 1 and returns often to discuss minuets. But he also explores
other compositional genres.

Examples 10-1, 10-2, and 10-3, only some of the variants Riepel offers
in an extended discussion of a symphonic allegro in Chapter 2 (1755;
pp. 64-87), indicate the wealth of issues that Riepel discusses. Example
10-1 is a composite of four separate examples. Although Riepel discusses
the entire allegro, only the first part (Theil), lasting up to the double bar,
is illustrated here. Riepel never lines up any examples one under the other,
as is done here. But his discussion demonstrates how these different ver-

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 273 ===

sions are expansions, contractions, and transformations of one another,
and how additional transformations could arise. The melody on staff
number 3 is the first version he offers. A briefer version could simply omit
measures 5 through 8. Or else, one could proceed directly from measures
1 through 6 to the four measures in brackets at the end of the example.
Staffs 2 and x are progressively more condensed versions of the original
version on staff 3.

Each version has its own integrity as a complete piece with balanced
phrases and a combination of related and contrasting motives. Thus, the
abbreviated version on staff 1 features an opening two-measure phrase
divided into two segments and answered by a two-measure phrase. The
reversal of the arpeggio to open the second phrase in measure 3 allows
the two phrases to be contrasting while still remaining related. The version
on staff 2 expands the concluding phrase to a pair of phrases, using the
closing motive of measures 3 and 4 to open measures 5 and 6. In the
original version on staff 3, the opening material forms a pair of two-
measure phrases. The four-measure length of this opening material is
reflected in the four measures for each of the two following phrases. The
opening pair of phrases has its own motivic parallelisms; the phrase in
measures 5 through 8 uses its opening motive as the basis of a sequence
before returning to a motive from the very opening at its cadence in
measure 8. The new theme beginning in measure 9 features a contour and
rhythm reversal of this motive from the opening, thereby providing both
thematic contrast and relationship.

The version on staff 4 is an expansion of the original version on staff
3, in which the opening two-measure phrases have become four-measure
phrases covering the same ground. Riepel notes that the two measures
after the + in this version could be repeated, expanding the version still
further. Or this version could be expanded much further, appearing with
a prefix and then a phrase in the parallel minor before proceeding to the
next material, as in Example 10-2.

Riepel also offers other transformations of the versions in Example 1o0-
1 that are not so much a matter of greater or lesser elaboration, but rather
of different realizations of the material. For instance, he suggests that the
version on staff 1 could appear with the first two cadences reversed, as
shown in Example 10-3. This would lead to different realizations.

When depicted as in Example 10-1, Riepel’s procedure seems to bear a
striking resemblance to Schenkerian hierarchical analyses. As Riepel ex-
plains, the briefer versions of this allegro are condensations of the same
content as the longer versions, “just as painters present a journey life size
on a piece of paper only a hand’s breadth wide in a so-called miniature”
(p. 65). If one wished to reduce the entire movement to its barest essentials,
“the miniature could be even smaller, namely only with letters, such as C-

Riepel on Melody and Phrases

263


=== PAGE 274 ===

264

even more briefly

ee

Allegro—Beginning of first part

@ -Absatz

Example ro-1. Riepel 1755, p. 65 (staffs 1 and 2), p. 64 (staff 3), p. 69 (staff 4)

G-C” (Riepel 1755, p. 65). At this level, which Riepel never depicts in
musical notation, entire segments of the piece are subsumed under a single
letter, all the characteristic shapes of the piece are absent, and issues of
balanced phrasing, motivic contrast, and the like, are no longer relevant.

But at all levels above this representation of the main keys, Riepel does
not view expansions and contractions as structural levels—as levels that
stand for greater or lesser structural depth in the piece. In fact, none of
these staffs on Example 10-1 are analyses at all in the sense of demon-
strations or explanations of the structure of another realization. Rather,

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 275 ===

3 Beginning of
piano forte second part

each is a different possible foreground realization of the basic material.
Riepel refers to a “miniature” as a complete painting, not as a sketch of
a larger painting.

Riepel’s different realizations are thus closer to thoroughbass realiza-
tions that are elaborated to a greater or lesser extent, such as those that
Niedt demonstrates when he turns thoroughbass progressions into various
dance types, or that Heinichen demonstrates when he notes that a bass
line descending from tonic to dominant is an expanded half-cadence. And
they are akin to the types of expansions noted by harmonic theorists such

Riepel on Melody and Phrases

265


=== PAGE 276 ===

266

piano

Example 10-2. Riepel 1755, p. 71. The chords appear as in a violin part;
Riepel does not intend 6/4 harmonies.

as Nichelmann when he demonstrates how a chord progression can be
realized by inserting additional harmonies between the originally adjacent
chords.

Riepel’s approach differs from these thoroughbass or harmonic alter-
natives in its concentration on melody. As long as expansions were per-
ceived in terms of thoroughbass realizations or harmonic progressions,
there was a limit to their structural dimensions. The realizations could be
longer or shorter, elaborated to a greater or lesser extent. But there was
little way to show how the results functioned as parts of pieces. Riepel,
however, performs these structural transformations not on undifferentiated
voice leadings or harmonic progressions, but rather on units that have
specific functions within a composition: phrases that end on the tonic, on
the dominant, on the dominant in the key of the dominant, and so forth;
phrases that open an allegro, occur after the establishment of a new key
in the allegro, and so forth. The transformations thus take place within a
distinct position in a complete composition, and can be tailored to the
compositional circumstances. For instance, the revised cadence scheme in
measures 1 and 2 of Example 10-3 is a conceivable variant in part because
of where the phrase occurs in the structure: different types of cadential
rhymes are possible in an opening pair of phrases or segments. The same
is true for the various ways of moving to the dominant key in the versions
shown in Example 1o-1. On staffs 2 and 3, there is a half cadence before
the arrival on the tonic of the new key (m. 5 on staff 2; m. 8 on staff 3).
But on staff 4, the corresponding cadence (m. 10) is on the tonic of the
new key. To repeat, these separate versions are neither analyses of one
another nor realizations of a single structure. They are explorations of the
various paths that a piece may take and, implicitly, illustrations of the
integrity that each realization must have.

Riepel applies his procedures not only to the construction of small

SS ee

Example 10-3. Riepel 1755, p. 65

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century

[etc.]


=== PAGE 277 ===

phrases and connections among them, but also to the construction of
entire movements. For instance, his treatment of the entire symphonic
allegro (of which the beginning is shown in Example 10-1) deals with the
possible keys that might be present after the double bar, various thematic
parallelisms between the first and second parts of the movement, and so
forth. Just as his concern at the phrase level is with multiple possible
realizations, on this larger scale too Riepel does not merely lay out one or
two schemes for a movement. Rather, he considers a range of possible
versions and their integrity. His is not a theory of form in the nineteenth-
century sense, but an approach to composition.

Another primary difference between Riepel’s transformations and those
of thoroughbass methods concerns the manner in which the transforma-
tions are worked out. Niedt’s thoroughbass method of composition clearly
involves something that could be improvised and then set down on paper.
Riepel’s method, by contrast, is not one that he ever explains as perform-
able. One can imagine Riepel working out a version by humming it or
playing it on the violin, considering its good qualities and defects, and
proceeding to improvise emended versions until a satisfactory entity arose.
But he never describes it in such a manner. Likewise, Koch, Riepel’s
successor in these matters, and also a violinist, implies that his is a written
method for composing, not one to be improvised, even though Koch argues
that the creative act itself is a product of the imaginative genius. Much as
the seventeenth century represents a transition from composition via vocal
improvisation to composition via keyboard improvisation (thoroughbass),
the treatises of Riepel and Koch appear to chronicle part of the transition
from composition from a bass part that could well be the result of an act
of improvisation to composition from an articulated melody that seems
to be less related to performed improvisation.

Riepel’s Influence and Problematic Aspects

It is difficult to gauge the extent of Riepel’s influence. His works were
known and reviewed from the time they began to appear, yet they do not
seem to have had much direct influence on any theorist other than Heinrich
Christoph Koch, whose treatises of the 1780s and 1790s were profoundly
influenced by Riepel. Marpurg gave glowing reviews to Chapters 1 through
3 in his Historische-Kritische Beytrage (1 [1755]: 340-343; 2 [1756]:
§14~521; 3 [1757]: 396). Concerning Riepel’s Chapter 1, Marpurg notes
that “books like this merit being in the hands of each and every practicing
composer, and ought to be read day and night.” Likewise, in his Handbuch
(p. 223), Marpurg recommends Riepel’s Chapter 1 for the study of rhythm.
But Marpurg also indicates that Riepel’s works were apparently not easily
available—in 1757 Marpurg reports that many readers of his earlier re-

Riepel on Melody and Phrases

267


=== PAGE 278 ===

268

views had found it impossible to find copies of Riepel’s works in any
bookstore. Leopold Mozart apparently owned copies of one or more
chapters and refers to Riepel in a 1778 letter to Wolfgang. In an earlier
letter, Wolfgang mentions that he had borrowed a copy of an unspecified
chapter.

With the sole exception of Koch’s writings, Riepel’s ideas do not seem
to have been directly adopted by other theorists. But this does not mean
his work may not have exerted a more indirect influence, or at least
chronicled teaching methods in use at the time that were not reflected by
other writings. Riepel’s emphasis on writing minuets, for instance, is re-
flected in Wolfgang Mozart’s own early education as well as his later
compositional instruction. Without much more knowledge than we now
possess on actual composition instruction (apart from published treatises
on composition) from the 1750s onward, it is probably impossible to
know whether such pedagogical similarities indicate a direct influence from
Riepel to Leopold and Wolfgang Mozart, or merely show that Riepel
himself was utilizing common methods that otherwise did not find their
way into print.

The absence of a more direct influence on Riepel’s contemporaries may
be the result of several factors, including changing musical styles and
inadequacies in Riepel’s own works. In the rapidly evolving styles of the
period, Riepel’s musical examples may have quickly seemed dated. This is
true both of the types of transformations that Riepel performs on his
material to create different versions of a passage, and also of stylistic
features in the examples themselves. When Riepel expands condensed
musical materials into a symphonic movement as shown in Examples 1o-
1, he expands all the material more or less equally, regardless of the role
that material plays in the structure of the movement. Thus, the 2+2
measure structure on staff 1 corresponds to an 8+9 measure structure on
staff 4. This rough equivalence of length belies the rather different struc-
tural functions of the music in these phrases. Measures 1 and 2 of staff 1
expound the tonic key, while measures 3 and 4 change the key to the
dominant, establish that key, and cadence in it. When Koch offers similarly
related condensed and expanded structures in the 1780s, there is a striking
difference between the extent to which he elaborates material of different
structural functions. For instance, when Koch expands an eight-measure
period into the thirty-two-measure first half of an allegro, he maintains
some portions in their original dimensions while he considerably expands
other portions (Example 11-14; Sisman 1982 explores this further).

In addition, Riepel often seems to regard the transformation of one set
of cadential articulations to another as a relatively minor change. Switch-
ing closed and open cadences between staff 1 of Example 10-1 and Ex-
ample 10-3 would give rise to profound effects in versions that elaborated

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 279 ===

Monte

== ee er aioe: tae ieaae|

Doe tats eS

Example 10-4. Riepel 1757, p. 1

one or the other of these structures. Likewise, changing the cadential
orientation before the new theme on staff 4 of Example 10-1 also carries
major consequences. From the perspective of the musical styles around
the middle of the century, Riepel may not have found these consequences
to be so important. But by the 1770s and 1780s, such differences carried
more weight.

Within his examples, Riepel cites various melodic-harmonic stereotypes
that were apparently quite common before and around the 1750s but that
were deemed obsolete by later generations. Example 10-4 shows one form
each of the patterns he laconically entitles Monte (mountain), Fonte (foun-
tain), and Ponte (bridge)—names that the Discantista, with Riepel’s char-
acteristic distaste for theoretical pretensions, accuses the Praeceptor of
having introduced “only to poke fun at those foreign terms which most
music writers throw in to cover their ignorance” (Riepel 1757, p. 1).
Riepel refers to these stereotypes repeatedly, using them as the basis for
melodic elaborations and discussing their roles within pieces. But he was
aware that “in many areas—even in the main musical centers—they were
discarded long ago, much like fake coinage” (Riepel 1765, p. 12). Koch,
writing over two decades later, introduces a few phrases that are similar
to these stereotypes. Without terming it a Monte, for instance, Koch
comments on an example quite close to Riepel’s, noting that “phrases that
ascend sequentially by step were quite frequently used in older pieces, and
to a certain extent have become obsolete” (zum Ekel worden sind; Koch
1782-1793, 2, par. 30). It is quite likely that by the 1770s and 1780s,
musicians regarded other aspects of Riepel’s examples and discussions as
archaic as well.

If Riepel’s ideas had been codified in a more systematic fashion, readers
might have been able to apply the principles he enunciates to different
styles more easily. (Such has been the case with Fuxian counterpoint, for
instance.) But Riepel’s discursive and frequently rambling dialogues can
make it difficult for a reader to extract general principles. To be sure, it
is probably unfair to charge Riepel with having failed to organize his
material in a more lucid fashion, considering that he was the very first to

Riepel on Melody and Phrases

269


=== PAGE 280 ===

270

try to put any of these ideas onto paper in any form at all. Viewed in this
light, his achievements are indeed remarkable.

HARMONY

A more serious problem with Riepel’s works, especially in the 1760s and
1770s, would have been his antiquated manner of dealing with harmony.
Riepel is virtually alone among writers after the midcentury in failing to
adopt the by-then universal vocabulary of harmonic theory. Riepel does
know about chord inversions, explaining that a 5/3 chord changing to a
6/3 chord is a change from the Grundnote in the bass to the Terzsprung
(Riepel 1757, p. 38). But he is quite inconsistent in applying these concepts.
He lists the inversions of seventh chords in the order 6/5, 6/4/3, 4/2, and
7, not with the root-position form as the basis; this reflects earlier thinking
that the 6/5 form was somehow more consonant since it does not feature
a dissonance over the bass. Even though he recognizes the 6/4/3 position
as an inversion of the others, Riepel seems unsure of the status of 6/4/3
chords; he questions them, noting that “Fux writes nothing of this deriv-
ation” (Riepel 1757, p. 40).4 Indeed, he even returns to the seventeenth-
century notion of the “irregular fourth” when he describes the fourth in
a 6/4/3 chord as “freely inserted” and complains about those who have
used this chord over scale-step 2 “during the past 50 years” (Riepel 1786,
p. 2). Likewise, in an unpublished treatise on fugue, Riepel rejects Ra-
meau’s notion that the 7 chord is the parent sonority of the remaining
inversions, explaining that “this is only based on numbers” (Twittenhoff
1935, p. 120). And finally, when Riepel changes the bass of a series of
seventh chords so that the chords appear as 7 6/5 7 6/5, not 7 7 7 7, he
recognizes that the new progression is related to the other progression by
chordal inversion; but then explains that since half the chords are no
longer figured with the number 7, “they can hardly be called seventh
progressions any more” (Riepel 1765, p. 3).

At the same time that he seems to reject much of chordal theory, Riepel
applies many aspects of Rameauian harmony. In his posthumous
Bafshliissel (1786), for instance, he explains that there are only three basic
chords: those on scale-steps 1, 4, and 5. All other chords are built on
subsidiary or supplementary tones or intermediary bass notes (Neben- or
Ausfiillungsténe or Mittelbassnoten; p. 6). This leads him to harmonize
melodies in a manner similar to that taught by Mozart in the 1784 studies.

4. Riepel frequently invokes Fux’s “incomparable Manuductio” (Riepel 1752, p. 75),
occasionally criticizing it. For instance, he faults Fux for rejecting the interval of an aug-
mented sixth (Riepel 1757, p. 44). Riepel not only accepts augmented sixth chords but even
presents them in all possible inversions (Riepel 1757, p. 64).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 281 ===

| indicates added notes
!

== Fe ae

fetc.}

—— tS

t

Example 10-5. Riepel 1768, p. 10

Riepel first applies root-position chords; then he changes the bass line to
introduce inversions.

Other discussions demonstrate a full grasp of chord integrity and chord
inversions. In Chapter 5 (1768), for instance, he warns that merely looking
at the consonances and dissonances will not by itself explain which pitches
are elaborations of the underlying chords. He illustrates with the two-part
excerpt and various elaborations shown in Example 10-5, marking the
elaborating notes. In the elaboration, note that Riepel properly under-
stands the bass D in measure 1 as the added tone, even though that note
makes a consonance with the melody’s Bb and the following E makes a
dissonance. But he never explains how a reader might figure this out,
either in terms of these examples, or via general principles.

Similarly, in discussing passing notes, he illustrates many examples
where passing-tone patterns are allowed or prohibited because of the
underlying harmony, although he never explains the issue in these terms
(see Example 10-6).

Furthermore, in his own informal vocabulary, Riepel clearly recognizes
various large-scale aspects of keys and harmonic structures. As previously
noted, in Example 10-1, he labels the cadence in measure 8 of staff 3 as
a Quint-Aenderungs-Absatz—a half cadence in the key of scale-step 5.
But as with other tenets of harmonic theory, he never teaches the reader
how to come to such a conclusion.

Whatever their problems, Riepel’s works are a major source of infor-

Poor vs. or or

Example 10-6. Riepel 1768, pp. 4-5

Riepel on Melody and Phrases

271


=== PAGE 282 ===

272

mation on a wide range of mid-eighteenth-century issues. He sheds light
on numerous issues. And his copious examples compensate in large part
for inadequacies in his presentation or vocabulary. His works, both pub-
lished and unpublished, merit an adequate modern edition for a full as-
sessment of his work.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 283 ===

CHAPTER ELEVEN

EE OK SP

Koch: Toward a Comprehensive
Approach to Musical Structure

What is the highest degree of perfection of the creative spirit among
composers? It is nothing other than the ability to conceive of melody
harmonically; that is, to invent it so that one is capable of bringing forth
simultaneously the main features of its harmonic accompaniment... “A
painter who has conceived of the color and position of a head, if he is a
Raphael or a Rubens, also sees at the very same moment the colors and
folds of the garments with which he must dress the rest of the body.”
This description of a creative painter, applied to a creative composer,
illuminates for us the creative method which the greatest masters of art
have always used.

Koch 1782-1793, 2, pp. 81-82

KoOcH IS OFTEN thought of as a theorist who built on the ideas first
enunciated by Riepel, treating melody, phrasing, and larger musical con-
structions more comprehensively and systematically than his predecessor
and applying them to a later repertoire—including the earlier works of
Haydn (some of whose compositions Koch discusses). This is certainly
true. But Koch is equally important for placing this approach to compo-
sition into a comprehensive theoretical approach to the music of his time.
Although his presentation of melody, phrasing, and what has come to be
known as musical form is justly regarded as his major achievement, this
aspect of his work cannot be fully appreciated outside the context of other
topics he treats. He discusses the physical source of music, presents a
comprehensive approach to harmony and counterpoint with several im-
portant innovations, and discusses aesthetics, all prior to an immensely
detailed study of melody, of the larger structural aspects of compositions,
and of compositional genres. Throughout, Koch’s aim is instruction in
composition. He thus draws together most of the theoretical domains of


=== PAGE 284 ===

274

the eighteenth century and shows how they contribute to what he clearly
regarded as the consummate musical activity—the creation of musical
works.

All this material appears in his three-volume Versuch einer Anleitung
zur Composition (1782-1793), the most informative treatise of the last
quarter of the century. This work is important not only for its content,
but also for its clarity and organization. Koch illustrates virtually every
point with musical examples. And he systematically divides his material
into volumes (Theile), parts (Abtheilungen), sections (Abschnitte), chapters
(Kapitel), some with subdivisions (Absdtze), and clauses (numbered con-
tinuously in each volume)—an organization that parallels his hierarchical
subdivisions of musical compositions and that betrays in its order his
historical position at the end of the rationalist Enlightenment.

The organization of the Versuch—an exposition of the sources of music,
of harmony and counterpoint, and of melody, form, and genre—became
the model for several later generations of theorists.! Koch’s ideas thus
form a fitting conclusion to the present survey of eighteenth-century theory.
The Versuch deals with many of the theoretical traditions of the eighteenth
century, giving the opportunity to observe how several different theoretical
approaches worked in concert and clashed with one another to create the
musical universe of the Classic era: Rameauian harmony joined with
thoroughbass concepts, counterpoint methodology applied to harmoni-
zation exercises, and so forth. Finally, both in its content and its organi-
zation the Versuch lays out the materials that occupied theorists for much
of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.

Koch was associated from age fifteen until his death with the court
chapel in Rudolstadt, where his father and grandfather had been instru-
mentalists and where he served as violinist, court musician (Hofmusikus),
chamber musician (Kammermusikus), and, briefly, Kapellmeister (although
he requested to be relieved of this latter post and return to the position of
concertmaster). The Versuch was his first published work but by no means
the last. He briefly edited a Journal der Tonkunst in 1795 and published
the important Musikalisches Lexikon in 1802 (the first original large-scale
dictionary of musical terms in German since Walther’s 1732 Lexicon) as
well as several other items. His ideas continued to evolve after the Ver-
such—for instance, in both the Lexikon and the Journal der Tonkunst he
takes note of Mozart’s works (mentioned only once in the Versuch).
Because of the comprehensive nature of the Versuch, and because Koch’s

1. This is true even of a work as late as Heinrich Schenker’s Neue musikalische Theorien
und Phantasien (1906-1935), which features a volume on the sources of sound and har-
mony, two volumes on counterpoint, and a volume on free composition, including a
discussion of musical form and rhythm.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 285 ===

later works exceed the historical boundaries of this study, the present
discussion is restricted to the Versuch.2

Harmony and Counterpoint

HARMONY
The first volume of the Versuch is devoted entirely to harmony and coun-
terpoint. Koch’s focus here as elsewhere is primarily practical. Before the
body of his text, he asks

Who is so inexperienced in the pedagogical history of composition that he
would deny that a beginner, when he has studied intervals, their combination
into chords, their progression, and the usual rules that are commonly given
for the preparation of a counterpoint, still remains in doubt and uncertainty
with the majority of notes he sets as to whether or not he has selected the
correct note? ... Why this uncertainty? It can only arise from a much too
obscure presentation of the diverse ways of connecting chords to make a
whole, that is, from the diversity of composition itself ... The leap from the
simplest parts of composition, i.e., from chords, to all this diversity is too
great [for the beginner], and he does not know how to bridge this gap. (1,
Pp. xv, xvii, xx)

Koch’s solution lies in his approach to accompaniment, a novel formula-
tion of what he calls five species of counterpoint that is in effect a series
of harmonization exercises of increasingly complex harmonic vocabulary,
quite similar in its practical effects to Kirnberger’s method of harmoni-
zation in Die Kunst des reinen Satzes (1771-1779).

Before presenting this solution, Koch lays out his thoughts on the origins
of tones, on intervals, on chords, and on chord progressions. As with
many of his contemporaries, he draws on ideas from a variety of theoretical
traditions but mostly from Marpurg’s works. Like Marpurg in his Hand-
buch (1755-1762), Koch mixes Rameauian notions of the origins of
chords and their invertibility with thoroughbass methodology and orga-
nization largely uninfluenced by root-progression thinking to explain the
use of harmonies and the resolution of dissonances. Discussions of root
progressions, as they occur in Rameau’s or Kirnberger’s writings, are
absent.

Like Rameau, Koch explains that musical sounds arise from a sonorous
body. Using a variety of experiments, he derives the major triad and links
it with its transpositions up and down a perfect fifth to form the major

2. The major studies of Koch include Ratner 1949, 1956, and 1980; Baker 1975, 1976,
1977, 1983, 1988; Dahlhaus 1978; and Sisman 1982. These studies cover various aspects
of Koch’s works; there is as yet no comprehensive study of his entire theoretical output
including his later works.

Koch: A Comprehensive Approach to Structure

275


=== PAGE 286 ===

Table 2. Koch’s matrix of triads in major keys

In the major key there are:

Essential Incidental

The scale degrees Triads 6-chords 6/4-chords Triads 6-chords 6/4-chords
On the tonic

On the second degree
On the third degree
On the fourth degree
On the fifth degree
On the sixth degree

On the seventh degree

Source: Koch 1782-1793, 1, p. 66.

scale. Koch then notes that the major scale includes three minor triads on
steps 2, 3, and 6. Only in one area does Koch introduce a novel chord
generation. Instead of generating seventh chords by adding a third above
a triad so that a triad and seventh chord share the same function, Koch
argues that all dissonant chords should be derived in a single manner (1,
pp. xxii—xxiii). “Entirely contrary to the usual theory,” he generates sev-
enth chords by placing a new bass a third below a triad by subposition
(Untersetzen; 1, p. 70). Thus, in C major he subposes G below a B triad
to derive the dominant seventh chord, since “B, the bass of this triad, is
a note that has the foundation of its existence in the note G” (1, p. 69).
Koch does not draw any conclusions about the use of the dominant seventh
chord from this idiosyncratic derivation, and it seems of no significance
after this point in the Versuch.

Koch generates chords not only to show a systematic origin of the
materials of music, but also to explore the role of the various triads in a
key. The triads on scale-steps 1, 4, and 5, which give rise to the key, are
the essential (wesentlich) chords, while the triads on scale-steps 2, 3, and
6 of a major key are incidental (zufallig).? Koch assigns each of the chords
a fixed position within the key. Table 2 shows his matrix of the triads in
a major key. He offers similar tables of the triads in a minor key and of
seventh chords (1, pp. 67, 99). Rameau had assigned special roles to the
tonic, dominant, and subdominant chords. But he had not specified any
special status for the remaining chords in a key. Koch’s classification of

3. Koch’s use of wesentlich and zufallig is distinct from Kirnberger’s use of the same
terms to indicate different types of dissonances within a chord.

276 Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 287 ===

6
5

= a

Example 11-1. Koch 1782-1793, 1, p. 180

ie ea Ps
See

chords into essential and incidental and the information in these tables
provides the conceptual basis for much of his later discussions.

Koch is fully conversant with chord inversions. But although he recog-
nizes and numbers chord inversions, surprisingly he has no term for the
root of a chord. He uses the term Grundton to denote the bass of a
sonority as well as the root of a chord (Baker 1983, p. 37). For instance,
discussing the diminished triad built on the leading tone in C major, he
first notes that “when scale-degree 4 of a given melody in the upper voice
descends by step to scale-degree 3, the root [Grundton] of the diminished
triad [the note B] can be set against it” (1, p. 270). In the very next
sentence he explains that this F-E may be accompanied by “the bass note
[Grundton!] D with its chord of the sixth, arising by means of the first
inversion of the diminished triad to become a chord of the sixth” (1,
p. 271). He also uses the term Grundton to refer to the tonic of a key (1,
p. 180).

Like Marpurg, Koch never uses the root or fundamental bass of a chord
to explain a progression. As a result, his extensive discussions of disso-
nance resolutions invoke chord inversions alongside explanations more
typical of thoroughbass manuals. His discussion of “the progression of
the major seventh accompanied by the major third and perfect fifth” (C-
E-G-B) is representative. Koch first lists the chord and its inversions. Then
he proceeds to harmonies that contain a major seventh but that are not
at all functionally related to that seventh chord:

After it has been prepared (in the strict as well as in the free style), the major
seventh is resolved one step downwards. Its resolution to a third, as well as
the chords arising from the inversion of this seventh chord, are those in
{Example 11-1]. If this chord of the major seventh is formed on the tonic
[Grundton] of a major key, its seventh can also be resolved a step upwards,
either to an octave in [Example 11-2a] (if the bass [Bass*] is maintained on
the same step), or to a third in [Example 11-2b] (if the bass moves a third

4. Here Koch uses the term Bass because he refers to the bass voice as an entity. This
usage is distinct from Grundton, by which Koch refers quite literally to the “foundation
tone” of a given harmony (either in the sense of the thoroughbass support for a chord or
for the root on which the chord is built).

Koch: A Comprehensive Approach to Structure

277


=== PAGE 288 ===

278

BU as

Example 11-2. Koch 1782-1793, 1, p. 181

lower). If, however, as often happens, it appears on the tonic of the scale
with the accompaniment of an eleventh,’ then it must always be resolved
upwards, as in [Example r1-2c]. (1, pp. 180-181)

The brief appendix to this chapter (1, pp. 213-218), dealing with the
treatment of unusual dissonances, is in the tradition of Heinichen’s expla-
nation of dissonances in the theatrical style.

Koch uses both subposition and the combination of altered scale degrees
to create various dissonant chords. Subposition yields ninth, eleventh, and
thirteenth chords. Altered scale degrees yield chords including the dimin-
ished triad and half-diminished seventh chord built on the raised sixth
step of the minor key and the augmented 6/4 on scale-step 7 in minor
keys. Koch does not apply either of these methods of generating dissonant
chords to explaining the resolution of the dissonance. As already noted,
he treats dissonance resolutions in the manner of thoroughbass methods.

Koch omits any discussion of the functionally directed resolution of
sensitive tones like the leading tone. The urge of the leading tone to resolve
played an important role in Rameau’s and Kirnberger’s ideas of harmonic
directionality. But Koch, following thoroughbass methods, offers only a
brief discussion of the leading tone. And he places it not in Volume 1
within the study of harmony, but in Volume 2 amid a discussion of general
aspects of melodic structure such as avoiding problematic interval succes-
sions, creating a sense of the key, and using rests properly (pp. 139-168).
The absence of a discussion of the leading tone as a driving force in
harmonic successions is not due to Koch’s ignorance of the idea, since he
prefaces his discussion of leading tones by citing Sulzer’s Allgemeine Theo-
rie (hence Kirnberger’s ideas) and includes Kirnberger’s extension of the
term leading tone (Leitton; equivalent to Rameau’s major and minor
dissonance) to scale-step 4 in a dominant seventh chord, and to all chro-
matically raised and lowered tones in similar positions (2, pp. 157-158).
Rather, Koch, like Marpurg, regards the linear context of harmonies to
be best explained by the treatment of individual notes, not by harmonic

5. Note that since the fourth is a suspension here, Koch calls it an eleventh in the
tradition of Rameau and Marpurg.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 289 ===

Example 11-3. Koch 1782-1793, 1, p. 162

progressions. In contrast to Rameau and Kirnberger, Koch does not view
the harmonic perspective as one that can deal with these matters.

Part of the reason that Koch does not treat leading tones as functionally
directed notes in a harmonic context has to do with his notion of cadences.
For Rameau and Kirnberger, cadences are models for harmonic progres-
sions, generating voice motions such as leading-tone and chord-seventh
resolutions. And for Rameau, evasion of cadential progressions is the path
to understanding chordal connections. For Koch, a cadence (Cadenz, Ton-
schluss) is simply a conventional formal punctuation that ends a musical
period conclusively. A cadence must end on a tonic chord with scale-step
1 in both bass and melody, preceded by a root-position dominant chord
and any of a variety of antepenultimate chords (1, pp. 240-244). Anything
less formal than this is a caesura that ends an inconclusive phrase (Casur
eines Absatzes; 1, p. 239), most commonly a phrase ending on the chord
built on scale-step 1 (Grundabsatz) or on scale-step 5 (Quintabsatz; 2,
p. 415; Baker 1983, p. 36). His detailed explanation of the final, penul-
timate, and antepenultimate chords of a cadence illustrate numerous com-
mon cadential progressions. But he is quite informal when it comes to
deceptive cadences, reserving for a “remark” at the end of his discussion
the suggestion that “if the cadence is repeated, or if two cadences follow
one another, sometimes one uses an unauthentic bass note [a note other
than scale-step 1] for the first cadence, thereby making a so-called decep-
tive cadence [Trugschluss]” (1, p. 243).

By mixing inversional thinking with chord roots and thoroughbass
methods, Koch retains several problems that continued to plague harmonic
theory through the end of the century. For instance, in the progression in
Example 11-3, Koch notes that “the fourth is not resolved,” in effect
resurrecting the “irregular fourth” of earlier thoroughbass methods. He
does not ban the progression; but he has no satisfactory explanation of
what we nowadays call passing second inversion chords. And Koch uses
Example 11-4 to explain “how a dissonance can be resolved by a regular
passing note.” For Rameau (and for most composers of the time) a chord
seventh such as the F in measure 2 would have to resolve to a chord tone
in the next harmony.

Koch: A Comprehensive Approach to Structure

279


=== PAGE 290 ===

280

page a

= +—
:

Example 11-4. Koch 1782-1793, 1, p. 225

COUNTERPOINT
After expositing intervals and chords and explaining dissonance resolu-
tions, Koch turns to “the centerpiece of my design, the position on which
[the first volume of] my Versuch must be judged” (1, p. xv). This is his
formulation of five species of counterpoint. His conception has little to do
with species counterpoint as presented by Fux (1725) or Albrechtsberger
(1790). Rather it is the manner by which

we wish to put into use simple harmony (i.e., the origin and connection of
tones, including the rules of their progression) . .. Nowadays one understands
by making counterpoint [contrapunctiren] or by accompanying harmonically
[harmonisch begleiten] that procedure whereby one sets to a given melody
one or several additional series of tones, that is, one or several additional
voices. The melody taken as the subject (Gegenstand] of the counterpoint is
called the fixed melody [feste Gesang] or cantus firmus. (1, pp. 231, 232)

Koch’s procedure is akin to the method of harmonization outlined by
Kirnberger in his Kunst des reinen Satzes. Like Kirnberger, Koch recom-
mends that one begin with a simple harmonic vocabulary and gradually
add more and more chords. But Koch’s gradations are more detailed and
systematic than Kirnberger’s. First species uses only the essential triads in
root position, with inversions only when needed to avoid parallel fifths or
octaves, as when moving between chords on scale-steps 4 and 5. Second
species adds inversions and the leading-tone triad. Third species adds the
incidental chords of the key. Fourth species adds suspensions and unpre-
pared sevenths on weak beats. And fifth species adds chromatic notes that
are not involved in large-scale key changes. Within each species, Koch
discusses separately setting a bass to a melody and setting a melody to a
bass. And within each species he treats even counterpoint (gleiche, or note
against note), uneven counterpoint (ungleiche, with rhythmically consis-
tent melody or bass elaborations), and mixed counterpoint (vermischte,
with rhythmically free melody or bass elaborations). The discussion of
two-part counterpoint is rather long (1, pp. 257-331), since this is where
Koch explains how to create a soprano-bass framework. The discussions
of three- and four-part counterpoint are considerably shorter (1, pp. 332—
347, 348-365).

Both in his prefatory “general rules and maxims” (1, pp. 237-256) and
within the discussion of counterpoint itself, Koch offers a combination of

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 291 ===

de ===!
ao tree rtp Pe rts

Example 11-5. Koch 1782-1793, 1, p. 273

cae

ella

traditional rules of voice leading (such as recommending contrary motion),
other voice-leading rules translated into harmonic terms, and various as-
pects of harmonic practice. Thus his first rule (1, p. 237) is that the
counterpoint begin with the triad built on the tonic of the key with an
octave or fifth between the outer voices (occasionally a third)—this is the
centuries-old rule that a counterpoint should begin with a perfect interval,
translated into tonal harmonic terms. His second rule recommends that
whatever the harmonic vocabulary in use, the beginning of a harmoniza-
tion should use mostly the essential chords of a key. Incidental chords and
chromaticism should appear only later. In both rules, as elsewhere, Koch
is thinking of the placement of the materials of music within phrases and
pieces.

Throughout, Koch’s viewpoint is fully harmonic. Two-part counterpoint
for him (just as for Mozart and Albrechtsberger) represents chords, not
merely intervals. And these chords always play specific roles within a key.
The discussion of Example 11-5, an exercise in second species in two
parts, is representative:

The bass note F used below the note A in the second measure must not be
regarded as the bass of the incidental triad FAC, but rather as the bass of
the chord of the sixth that arises from the inversion of the essential triad
DFA . .. The beginning of the second phrase in the first part can be
accompanied harmonically in more than one manner with respect to its
structure [in Ansehung der Modulation’). The succession G/GFEA etc. can
be regarded as entirely within the key of A minor (since the seventh degree
of the minor scale can be minor when descending), in which case the bass
voice must have the form shown [in Example 11-6] according to this species.

sala ceaddin

Example 11-6. Koch 1782-1793, 1, p. 274
(realized from letter notation)

6. Koch uses the term modulation in its traditional sense of the structure or patterning
of a melody (“the diversely changeable rise and fall of the tones within a fundamental key”;
2, p. 138).

Koch: A Comprehensive Approach to Structure

281


=== PAGE 292 ===

282

Example 11-7. Koch 1782-1793, 1, p. 275
(realized from letter notation)

Example 11-8. Koch 1782-1793, 1, p. 292

Or else the opening note of this phrase (the G) can be regarded as a note
with which a brief change of key [einer kurzen Ausweichung] to the key of
C major should be made in the structure of the melody. This returns to the
fundamental minor key at the note A on the last quarter note. And then the
note G, with which the phrase begins, can be treated just like a note in the
major key, as [shown in Example 11-7]. Or else this opening note G can
even be considered as a note still contained within the key of A minor, after
which the structure appears to go to the key of C major on the repetition of
this note. With the note A, the structure returns once again to the principal
key of the melody. The structure in [Example 11-5] is treated in this manner.

(1, pp. 273-275)

With fifth species, Koch introduces what is probably the clearest expla-
nation of any theorist in the eighteenth century of brief instances of
chromaticism within a key (1, pp. 292-300). To emend the absence of
terminology for this phenomenon, he labels it “an incidental, or still better,
a brief optional change of key” (zufallige or kurze willkiihrliche Auswei-
chung; 1, p. 292):

Under the heading of optional change of key I do not understand those
changes of key which the succession of notes of a given melody necessarily
prolongs; thus, for example, the change of key [Ausweichung] from C major
to the modified [modificirte] key’ of G major in the phrase of the well-known
chorale [shown in Example 11-8] is not optional, but necessary. Rather, I
understand under the heading of such an optional change of key that pro-
cedure where one presents a succession of two or more notes of the given
melody as a succession of notes in another key, and accompanies such a
presentation accordingly. A few examples will make this more intelligible.
The phrase in [Example 11-9a] contains a succession of notes that truly

7. Koch means by this locution that G is a key that requires accidentals modifying the
key signature. Elsewhere, he also uses the term transposed in this sense.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 293 ===

i

fasgypesiaments

Example 11-9. Koch 1782-1793, 1, pp. 293-294

belongs entirely to the key of C major, and the accompaniment is arranged
entirely according to this key. But the succession of notes EDCB in this phrase
can be regarded (without considering the preceding or succeeding notes) as
a succession of notes belonging to the key of A minor (as one can see in the
phrase in [Example 11-9b]). One can also regard it as a succession of notes
that belongs to the transposed key of G (as in [Example 11-9c]).

If we now consider the two notes DC in the accompanied phrase in
[Example 11-9a] as a succession of notes belonging to A minor, but with the
remainder belonging to the main key, then we can accompany the melody as
in [Example 11-9d]. But if we regard the notes CB as a succession in the
modified key of G, then the accompaniment can be arranged as in [Example
11-9e]. (1, pp. 292-293)

Other theorists had presented these ideas before—Rameau with his
notion of the reigning key as opposed to temporary keys, and Kirnberger—
but not with such clarity. And no other theorist had attempted to establish
a terminology for this procedure (although Koch’s terminology did not
become standard).

Like Kirnberger, Koch extends the notion of optional changes of key to
the phrase level: “What was said above concerning optional changes of
key in the succession of individual notes can occasionally also be used for
entire phrases” (1, p. 298). In Volume 2, Koch expatiates on optional
changes of key within an extensive discussion of keys, their relationships,
and the various ways of changing keys. He distinguishes three categories
of key changes: incidental changes of key, which are quite brief, passing
(durchgehende) changes of key, which either return shortly to the original
key or proceed to a further key, and formal (férmliche) changes of key,
which last a considerable amount of time and lead to a cadence in the
new key.® Although incidental changes of key may be brief and may only
momentarily disturb the continuity of the larger key, nevertheless such

8. Carl Dahlhaus argues that Koch lacks a distinction between sections that are tonally
closed and those that are transitional (Dahlhaus 1978, pp. 158—159). But here and in his
terminology for phrases that are tonally mobile (Uebergang, Zuriickgang, Zergliederungs-
satz), Koch does indeed make such differentiations.

Koch: A Comprehensive Approach to Structure

283


=== PAGE 294 ===

284

Example 11-10. Koch 1782-1793, 2, p. 416

brief changes are indeed changes of key at the most local level. Thus the
first phrase ending in Example 11-10 “cannot be considered as a phrase
ending that is made on the triad on the fourth degree in C major; rather
it must be considered as a tonic phrase-ending in F major” (2, p. 416).

KOCH AND OTHER EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY THEORIES

OF HARMONY

Koch does not explain chord-to-chord progressions as Rameau, Kirnber-
ger, Martini, and others do via root movements and fundamental bass. In
fact, it could be argued that Koch does not try to explain specific chord
progressions at all. Rather, he describes innumerable harmonic usages via
his notion of essential chords that enunciate a tonal area complemented
by incidental chords that provide other avenues of harmonic motion, and
via his notion of which chords can begin a phrase or section and how
formal cadences provide a proper ending. He also differentiates harmonic
progressions according to whether they are appropriate to strict style,
fugal style, or free style.

By specifying where different types of chords may occur within phrases,
Koch reverses Rameau’s agenda. Rameau begins by questioning why it is
that the arrival on a consonant chord does not cause a phrase to end.
Building on Zarlino’s notion of evaded cadences, Rameau studies root
movements and chord types to understand how what might have been a
point of repose is in fact an incomplete cadential progression demanding
some sort of continuation until a true cadence occurs. Rameau thus implies
that during a phrase, directed harmonic motions are continually evasive
until a cadential progression appears.

Koch, by contrast, begins by assuming that a phrase is an entity, one
that includes particular progressions at particular points because that is
where they belong within a phrase. Cadential progressions belong at the
end of a phrase; incidental chords are improper too early in a phrase or
piece; and so forth. Although he may not be able to answer the questions
that Rameau poses, he does impart advice about when to use various types
of chords more successfully and systematically than most other late-eigh-
teenth-century theorists.

Changing musical styles may have been a major factor in the different
approaches to harmonic progressions taken by Rameau and Koch. Rameau

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 295 ===

in his early years was faced with a musical style that often features rapid
harmonic changes and relatively long, unarticulated phrases. Koch, by
contrast, was dealing with a style featuring relatively short, articulated
phrases within which different types of chords appear at different points.

Another fundamental difference between Rameau and Koch concerns
the relative status of bass and melody as the determining voice of a
composition. Rameau, like thoroughbass theorists, always views the bass
as a primary determinant of compositional structure. Koch, by contrast,
lived in an era in which articulated melodies were the starting point for
composition. Koch’s goal in teaching harmony in the first volume of the
Versuch is to prepare his readers to compose melodies. He agrees that
deriving a melody from a sequence of chords is an important exercise
(probably a reference to thoroughbass methods like Niedt’s and funda-
mental-bass treatises like Rameau’s or Nichelmann’s). But he insists that
this approach is inadequate for modern music (2, p. 79-81).

Instead of relying on chords as the source of melody, Koch wants the
composer to learn how to conceive of melodic ideas along with their
supporting harmonies—“to think of the melody harmonically” (die Mel-
odie harmonisch zu denken; 2, p. 76). This invocation to conceive of
melody and harmony as complementary was Koch’s answer to the burning
issue of so much eighteenth-century polemic—the priority of melody versus
harmony. A beginner might find it quite difficult to compose this way, but
Koch believes that repeated practice with his five species of counterpoint
will promote this ability (2, p. 92).

Melody and Phrasing

Koch was proud of his contrapuntal species because they teach how
melody and harmony are coordinated. For Koch, melody is the heart of a
composition. As the principal voice (Hauptstimme), it contains “the out-
line of the painting, the specific content of the composer’s conception
[Ideal].” The bass presents “the foundation of the harmonic fabric with
which this picture is painted.” And the middle, supporting, or secondary
voices (Mittel-, Fiull-, oder Nebenstimmen) provide “the drapery, decora-
tion, and completion” (2, p. 4). Having demonstrated these relationships
in volume 1, Koch was ready to proceed to the centerpiece of his treatise,
the study of melody and larger constructions in Volumes 2 and 3.

Riepel too had made melody his centerpiece. But Koch, by first expos-
iting his notion of harmonically conceived melody, constructs a far more
compelling perspective. Koch may never have verbalized the idea in this
fashion, but if melody is conceived harmonically, then a melodic phrase
is also a harmonic motion writ large. Koch’s extended presentation of
melody and larger constructions that arise from melodic phrases deals

Koch: A Comprehensive Approach to Structure

285


=== PAGE 296 ===

286

with harmony—not only in the sense of the chords and voice leading that
are the framework of the melodies, but also as the congruous union of all
the elements of music on a large scale.

Koch recognizes two aspects of melody: its inner character, which is
ultimately beyond explanation, and its outer aspect, which he believes can
be explained according to “mechanical rules” (mechanische Regeln; 2,
pp. 7-8). These rules form the core of Volumes 2 and 3 of the Versuch
(2, PP. 135-464; 3, pp. 1-430; Baker 1983). Koch often restates the
contents of Riepel’s chapters: phrases are malleable units, transformable
according to a number of specific techniques; and the connection of
phrases one to another according to their cadential orientation creates the
larger constructions of music.

But where Riepel presents his materials discursively in a dialogue, Koch
offers a systematic exposition, proceeding from basic definitions to small
phrases and small formal units, the techniques of phrase expansion and
larger units, and then genres and their characteristics. Just as Koch orga-
nizes harmonization into five applicable species of counterpoint, he pre-
sents much of his discussion of melody via a series of compositional
exercises. As in his earlier discussions of harmony and counterpoint, the
text is illustrated with many hundreds of musical examples.

Responding to the lack of generally accepted terms for melodic construc-
tions, Koch begins with definitions (2, pp. 342; Baker 1983, pp. 1).
Although he realizes that analogies between the articulation of language
and the structure of music can only be carried so far, he likens the sub-
division of larger musical units to subdivisions in language. Superficially,
Koch’s analogies between music and language appear to put him in the
same category as Mattheson and others who borrowed many concepts
from rhetoric. But where Mattheson’s application of rhetorical terms often
fails to illuminate the musical structure on its own terms, Koch’s emphasis
is always on the music. Koch explains that he had extensively examined
musical phrases as grammatical utterances with subject and predicate in
earlier drafts, but that he found this approach unworkable (2, 350-356;
Baker 1983, pp. 4-6).

A musical period (Period) is a complete thought ending with a strong
punctuation. A phrase (Satz) is a part of a period and may be the closing
phrase of a period (Schlusssatz) or an inconclusive phrase (Absatz). A
phrase is inconclusive either because it ends on the dominant or another
nontonic chord, or because it ends without a formal cadence. For instance,
all three phrases in Example 11-11 are inconclusive. The third phrase ends
on “the fifth of an essential triad” (with the G supported by a tonic
triad)—an inconclusive phrase may even end without any harmonic
motion.

A phrase itself is divisible into segments (Einschnitte; 2, p. 346; Baker

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 297 ===

Example 11-11. Koch 1782-1793, 2, pp. 359, 391; Baker 1983, Ex. 14, 15, and 67

1983, p. 2).? Koch frequently applies symbols akin to Riepel’s black or
white squares (which Riepel used for complete or incomplete phrases).
Koch uses a white square to indicate the end of an inconclusive phrase
and a white diamond to indicate the end of a segment. He has no symbol
for closing phrases “because the cadential formula distinguishes them
sufficiently” (2, p. 363; Baker 1983, p. 9).

Phrases and segments “are distinguished from one another as parts of
the whole chiefly by two characteristics: first, the type of their endings
. . . second, the length of these parts along with a certain symmetry or
proportion, or a certain relationship of these parts which can be found in
the number of measures they contain when they are reduced to their
essential components” (2, p. 343; Baker 1983, pp. 2-3). An inconclusive
phrase differs from a closing phrase by the type of ending (the first of
these characteristics). And a segment is defined primarily by its length (it
is too short to be a phrase).

A third aspect of phrases, the degree of completion, depends on length.
An inconclusive phrase or a closing phrase may be a basic phrase (enger
Satz) with only enough music to be complete, or it may be an extended
phrase (erweitere Satz; 2, p. 346; Baker 1983, p. 3). Extended phrases
may repeat part of a phrase (the beginning, middle, or end) or add an
appendix (Anhang). Koch treats each procedure in detail (2, pp. 424-4533
Baker 1983, 41-54). A part of a phrase may be repeated on the same
scale degree or on a different one. There may be only one repetition or
there may be many. Repetitions may be literal, transposed to form a
sequence within a key (Progression; 2, p. 431; Baker 1983, p. 43), trans-
posed to form a sequence in another key (Transposition; 2, p. 432; Baker
1983, p. 44), or varied by figuration.

9. Baker and some others translate Einschnitt as incise. But incise is not a noun in English

dictionaries. Segment includes the two relevant aspects of Einschnitt: that a segment is a
part of a phrase and that it arises by cutting or dividing (einschneiden) a phrase.

Koch: A Comprehensive Approach to Structure

287


=== PAGE 298 ===

288

Periodicity and balance are of central importance to Koch’s notion of
extended phrases. The proportion of preceding and following phrases
should respond to the basic length of a phrase, not its apparent length.
Thus a five-measure phrase arising from a four-measure phrase through
the repetition of a measure “is considered as a four-measure phrase with
regard to the rhythmic relation [rythmischen Vergleichung] of phrases”
(2, 427-428; Baker 1983, p. 42). But Koch is ever the practical musician.
If a repeated measure within a four-measure phrase is so varied that its
status as a repetition is not entirely obvious, then the resulting unit should
be treated as a five-measure phrase in its connection to other phrases.
There are innumerable discussions like this, each illustrated by musical
examples.

Phrases may be separate. Or several phrases may join to form a com-
pound phrase (zusammengeschobener Satz) (2, pp. 453-464; Baker 1983,
pp. 54-59). This can arise from suppression of a measure (Tacterstickung,
Tactunterdriickung; 2, p. 453; Baker 1983, p. 55), making the last measure
of one phrase the first measure of the next, compounding the two phrases.
Or two segments may remain incomplete only to be answered by a longer
phrase, as in a 2+2+4 construction. For modern musicians, these two
procedures (suppressing a measure and building a 2+2+4 contruction)
may seem separate; but Koch understands both under the rubric of com-
pound phrases.

Koch does not discuss the thematic roles of phrases as systematically as
he treats their structural properties. But various remarks show that he is
aware of this aspect. The opening of a piece is often the principal phrase
(Hauptsatz) or theme (Thema) containing the principal idea (Hauptge-
dank) of a piece, the idea “that defines the sentiment that the whole should
arouse” (2, pp. 347-348; Baker 1983, p. 3). Later phrases, which “present
various expressions of this sentiment,” are dissection phrases (Zergliede-
rungssdtze; ibid.), probably so named because they dissect the piece into
its parts. Earlier, Koch refers to “connecting and dissection phrases or
subsidiary ideas” (Verbindungs- und Zergliederungssatzen oder Neben-
gedanken; 2, p. 99).!° It is not entirely clear how the phrase “various
expressions of this sentiment” is to be understood. If Koch means that a
piece should express a single sentiment or affect, he is arguing that later
phrases should retain the main sentiment of the movement. But if he is
talking about theme in the sense of subject matter for development, then
Koch may be arguing that all later musical materials should derive from
the opening phrase.

Koch is interested not only in a phrase’s content, structure, and role but
also in its notation. He extensively discusses metric notation and its rela-

to. Baker interprets the term Zergliederungssatz differently (Baker 1983, p. 3).

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 299 ===

ES aon

(false)

Example 11-12. Koch 1782-1793, 2, pp. 397, 398; Baker 1983, Ex. 79, 81

detlactihtds

PP eeSes See ee eee

—o-

Example 11-13. Koch 1782-1793, 2, p. 400; Baker 1983, Ex. 86

tion to phrase structure. Among the issues he raises is whether to notate
in simple or compound meters (2/4 versus 4/4; 3/8 versus 6/8). The design
of the phrase ending is an important factor. When melodic figuration
continues past the downbeat into the middle of the compound measure in
what he calls an overhang (Ueberhang) or feminine ending (weiblichen
Ausgang; 2, p. 394; Baker 1983, p. 24), the cadential figuration should
not extend into a new measure. In Example 11-12, where this happens,
Koch insists that the phrase should be notated in cut C, not in 2/4.1! Koch
also differentiates the basic (eigentlich) form of a phrase ending, in which
such figuration occurs only in the melody (as in the first phrase of Example
11-12) from the figured or decorated (uneigentlich) form of a phrase
ending where even the harmonic motion extends past the downbeat, as in
Example 11-13."

11. In the first phrase, Koch places the squares indicating the endings of inconclusive
phrases as shown here. In her translation, Baker frequently moves such squares in order to
emend what seem to be inconsistencies in Koch’s placement (Baker 1983, p. xxiv). Nola
Reed Knouse argues that there may be consistencies underlying many of Koch’s apparent
misplacements (Knouse 1986, pp. 145~146). In the examples in the present study, the
squares and triangles are placed where they appear in the Versuch.

12. Baker translates eigentlich and uneigentlich as proper and improper, making it seem
as if Koch proscribes phrase endings where the harmonic motion continues past the down-
beat (p. 28). But Koch more likely uses the dichotomy eigentlich-uneigentlich in the sense
literal-nonliteral or basic-figurative. In any case, Koch introduces other such uneigentlich
phrase endings without censuring them (as in 2, p. 408; Baker 1983, ex. 100).

Koch: A Comprehensive Approach to Structure

289


=== PAGE 300 ===

290

Larger Musical Constructions

Having explained the various types of melodic constructions and a vast
range of their transformations, Koch turns in Volume 3 to “The Connec-
tion of Melodic Sections or the Construction of Periods.” He proceeds
from short compositions (dances, themes for variations) to larger construc-
tions (such as the allegro of a symphony, sonata, or concerto). All these
movement structures arise from evermore extended use of the techniques
of phrase expansion applied both within phrases and to phrases them-
selves. Just as a portion of a phrase may be repeated, transposed, or
otherwise transformed, phrases themselves are treated in that manner in
larger compositions.

These discussions are extensive (pp. 39-152; Baker 1983, pp. 78-128
on short compositions alone). Koch repeatedly reworks several basic ex-
amples into a range of structures. In addition, he introduces compositions
by others to illustrate various points. The composers Koch draws on
include Haydn (cited the most frequently, including the entire slow move-
ment of his Symphony No. 42), C. P. E. Bach, Carl Heinrich Graun (c.
1704-1759), Christian Gotthelf Scheinpflug (1722-1770; Koch’s teacher
and predecessor at Rudolstadt), and others.

At the very end of his discussion of such melodic extensions, Koch
expands an eight-measure period into the first period of an allegro move-
ment, thirty-two measures long. Triangles and squares label its various
segments and inconclusive phrases, and annotations refer the reader to the
appropriate discussion of each of the means of expansion. Example 11-
14 arranges the original period and its expansion in the manner of a
comparable set of examples by Riepel in Example 10-1. Each of Koch’s
cross-references is explained briefly.¥

There are important differences between Koch’s discussion and Riepel’s
similar examples. Whereas Riepel tends to expand all sections of his basic
structure to form longer versions, Koch expands his basic version unevenly
according to the structural role of the musical material. The opening pair
of two-measure phrases in the original period appear as two five-measure
phrases in the expansion. These two phrases, which establish the tonic
key and move to prepare for the departure from that key, account for half
of the entire period in the original version, but less than a third of the
expansion. By contrast, the pair of two-measure phrases that follow, which
move to and cadence in the dominant, are more extensively expanded (13
and 9 measures).

This difference between Riepel and Koch directly reflects changes in
compositional styles from the music of the 1750s and earlier that formed

13. These two examples are discussed in Ratner 1956 and Sisman 1982.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 301 ===

Poco allegro

e — Peel
=
=o x SS ¢ +
a: —
{repetition on other scale degrees]
Poco allegro A a
= a
aes ei ee
=> =
th Za
=.
[repetition with [extension using previous
[appendix] exchange of voices] rhythmic pattern}
= * th e— Y » tr tr f a
o—
cfutibleress

setts =
[interpolation of an oy [repetition on same
incidental passage) harmonic foundation)
10 D ; a i
r
for. [final decoration P
sf a of phrase} =
é [repetition on other {extension using previous ‘i
scale degrees, } ee rhythmic pattern] [sequence (Progression)]
ry A
—~ fe be r Ps
prises = DE Soe ttete ppt ==)
rT
=> 2
[appendix with final
decoration of phrase}
ae = a
é offerte te DS ee
+ @
LS See Pe ee Zit wa
= eS
—
e ext, elet r
& 5 $= Coe a

[repetition of end of [phrase extension by continuing

losing phrase a figure or passagio}
4 te A x acl
ad e pet? ca 2
Qbear hp eie et err tlererrteter
—

at

{repetition on another scale degree
28 with change of key)

e- » fete ¢ ©
fier =o
{new appendix attached
=

3 to closing phrase)
Example 11-14. Koch 1782-1793, 3, pp. 226—230; Baker 1983, Ex. 361, 362

Koch: A Comprehensive Approach to Structure 291


=== PAGE 302 ===

292

the model for Riepel and the music of the 1770s that served as Koch’s
models.14 In addition to the proportion of the expansion that presents the
bulk of the music in the nontonic key, also significant is the extent to
which the two opening phrases in the expansion (mm. 1-5, 6—10) are
mostly expanded at their beginnings while the closing phrase is extended
primarily via repetitions and the composition of a series of interlocking
cadential phrases, directly mirroring allegro structures of the 1770s.

Whereas Riepel had suggested a range of alternate cadential patterns
that would substantially change the nature of the form, Koch does not
tamper with these articulative features. In fact, he probably designed the
basic version in Example 11-14 with specific structural features of the
expanded version in mind. The larger version has an air of authenticity to
it. But the basic version, with its short subdivisions and their square
endings, seems very much like a condensation of the longer version.

These features raise the same questions as with Riepel as to whether
these examples of expansion and contraction should be understood as
structural levels and not only as variable versions of a basic structure. As
in Riepel, the examples are primarily separate realizations of a possible
structure, not substructures of other levels. But at the same time, the
analytic aspect is more convincing in Koch’s Versuch than it is in Riepel’s
Anfangsgriinde because of several factors. One is the much stronger sense
of harmonic underpinning in Koch’s work. Where Riepel presents only
vaguely defined harmonic ideas, Koch builds his larger structures from
“harmonically conceived melodies.” Koch’s more comprehensive har-
monic perspective leads one to look at many of his expansions not only
as extensions of a basic phrase, but also as prolongations of a basic
harmony. In Example 11-14, for instance, there is a clear parallelism
between the rise to scale-step 3 in the basic version and the motivic
parallelism that Koch uses to ascend to scale-step 3 in measures 1 through
3 of the expanded version. Likewise, the phrase extension after measure
6 in the expanded version is based on an exchange with an inner voice in
measure 7 and then the extension of the resulting structure—once again
the result is an expansion of the phrase and a working out of its motives
along with a prolongation of the underlying harmony. Similarly close
relationships between the harmonic underpinnings of original versions and
their expansions are pervasive throughout the Versuch. But Koch never
treats these issues in his remarks.

Koch clearly has a sense of levels of essential structure and detail in a
piece. Within a phrase or segment, he discusses harmony via his five species
of counterpoint. From the level of the segment up to the extended and

14. Sisman 1982 and Wagner 1984 note the extent to which Koch’s Versuch specifically
pertains to music of the 1770s.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 303 ===

compounded phrases that constitute his extended periods, his focus is
entirely different, using the language of phrase manipulation. But he could
hardly have used any other language. His theories of harmony were a
combination of vertical structures as in Marpurg’s interpretations of Ra-
meau, along with the isolated treatment of point-to-point relationships of
thoroughbass approaches. The linkage that he makes with larger structures
is through his notion of harmonically conceived melody. Melodic motions
articulated into phrases are in effect also extended harmonic structures.
Since phrases are in some sense harmony writ large, Koch’s study of
phrases and larger constructions (which are themselves the result of ex-
pansions of phrases) is in a very real sense a hierarchical view of music
with changes in emphasis from the more immediate connections to the
largest aspects of a piece.

Koch surely did not offer a fully developed theory of hierarchical struc-
tural levels. But at the same time, he did offer a comprehensive approach
to music in which all the elements of a composition, from details of voice
leading through the largest aspects of complete movements could be related
to one another. No other theorist of the eighteenth century even came
close to such an achievement.

Complete Movements

Koch treats the structure of complete movements under the heading “The
Connection of Melodic Sections into Periods of Greater Length, or the
Arrangement of Larger Compositions” (3, pp. 231; Baker 1983, pp. 165).
By viewing what later came to be known as musical form as a product of
the connection of periods, Koch sees crucial aspects of movements in quite
a different light than later theorists. What makes the matter more complex,
however, is that Koch himself discusses various features of complete move-
ments that are not compatible with his own notion of larger structures
being formed by the connection of periods—features that are in fact those
stressed by later theorists of musical form. The present discussion surveys
Koch’s ideas and compares them to some later notions.*5

For Koch, periods, as composites of phrases, are defined by two primary
characteristics, their length and the tonal orientation of their ending: “By
a principal period I mean the connection of several phrases, of which the
last closes with a formal cadence either in the principal key or in one
closely related to it” (3, pp. 231-232; Baker 1983, p. 166). The length of
a period depends on the length and structure of the relatively simple or

15. Dahlhaus 1978 raises some of the issues dealt with here along with others and draws
some different conclusions. The modern scholar who first called attention to Koch’s view
of the period structure of a movement is Leonard Ratner in 1949.

Koch: A Comprehensive Approach to Structure

293


=== PAGE 304 ===

294

complex phrases that constitute it. For example, each of the two versions
in Example 11-14 presents a single period, even though the original version
is eight measures long and the expansion thirty-two. According to Koch’s
notions of balance and proportion, the length of a period determines in
part the balance required by later periods in the piece. Thus the eight-
measure version in Example 11-14 would require later periods to be less
extensive than those required by the thirty-two-measure expansion. The
ending of a period is its formal cadence. This cadence is always, by Koch’s
definition, a full close on the tonic of some key, but not necessarily the
principal key of the movement. The period in both versions in Example
11-14 ends in the key on scale-step 5.

The structure of a movement depends on the number of periods and
the tonal orientation of their endings. The allegro of a symphony, for
instance, has three periods, corresponding to the three principal sections
of sonata form that we know as the exposition, the development, and the
recapitulation. Since the terms sonata form, exposition, development, and
recapitulation were unknown to the eighteenth century, the present dis-
cussion follows Koch and refers to such movements as allegros and to
their parts as the first, second, and third periods.

Koch’s description of an allegro as the connection of periods is prob-
lematic in several ways. First, it ignores the larger repetition scheme of the
movement. Koch recognizes that allegros have two repeatable parts
(Theile), with period 1 comprising the first part, and periods 2 and 3
forming the second part (3, pp. 304, 307; Baker 1983, pp. 199). If the
parts are repeated as commonly indicated in scores of the time, then the
sequence of periods in the movement would be 1 1 2 3 2 3. This differs
from periods 1 2 3, as Koch lists them. Apparently he did not consider
large-scale repetition of parts as an essential feature of movement
construction.

A second problem concerns the adequacy of defining the status of a
period solely by the tonal orientation of its ending. As Koch himself
discusses, the beginnings of each of the three periods in an allegro also
present important features. Although his most extended discussion of
allegros occurs in Volume 3 (pp. 304-311; Baker 1983, pp. 199-201),
Koch deals with the tonal orientation of these periods in Volume 2 even
before he discusses melody. As part of his explanation of keys, key changes,
and the role of various keys in a movement, Koch surveys the tonal
structure commonly used in unspecified movements of symphonies, quar-
tets, trios, and sonatas. In a major key, the first period establishes the tonic
and then shifts to the fifth, cadencing there. The second period begins in
this key and moves to the minor key on scale-step 6. After a cadence in
this key, there is either an immediate return to the opening phrase (An-
fangssatz) in the tonic, or else there is a transition back (Zuriickgang) to

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 305 ===

the tonic, usually via passing changes of key (durchgehenden Ausweich-
ungen). Alternatively, the second period can leave the key of scale-step 6
without a cadence and proceed to the key of scale-step 4 and cadence
there. Or else it may go to scale-step 3 or even 2. The third period is a
concluding period (Schlussperiod), primarily in the principal key, although
the key of scale-step 4 sometimes appears temporarily without a formal
cadence (2, pp. 223-225). In minor keys, the first period generally goes
to the major key on scale-step 3 and the second period moves to the minor
key on scale-step 5. Or else this is reversed, and the first period moves to
the minor key on 5 and the second period moves to the major key on 3
(2, pp. 237-238).

Thus, in each of the periods of an allegro, critical features occur prior
to the ending orientation, despite Koch’s basic definition of a period’s
structure being determined by its length and ending. Period 1 terminates
in a nontonic key, but its beginning announces the principal key of the
movement. Period 2 may well begin in an important key other than where
it cadences. And the beginning of period 3 is defined primarily by the
arrival on the tonic key; without this criterion, the transition after a
cadence in the key of 6 in the second period could be the beginning of the
third period.

A third problem with Koch’s definition concerns whether period 2
qualifies to be a period at all. If periods must end with a formal cadence,
then period 2 often does not meet the definition of a period, since its main
cadence may occur before the end of the period. If there is a transition
following a cadence in the key of 6, is the transition part of the second
period, in which case the second period defies the definition of a period
by not ending with a cadence? Or does the transition begin the third
period, which contradicts Koch’s musical sense that period 3 begins with
the firm arrival back on the tonic? Or does the transition belong to neither
period, in which case the movement does not in fact consist only of the
connection of periods? Koch neither raises nor answers these questions.
His silence on such definitional distinctions implies that he recognizes
movements arising not only from the cadential orientation of the constit-
uent periods, but also from the tonal orientation of the sections represented
by these periods.

A fourth inadequacy of Koch’s basic definition of a movement as a
composite of periods concerns the absence of thematic functions in this
perspective. He recognizes that a successful movement needs to have “an
adequate variety of parts, or a sufficient interchange and alternation be-
tween the principal ideas combined with the connecting phrases and dis-
section phrases or subsidiary ideas, and a precise and completely suitable
connection of all these ideas” (2, p. 99). The opening phrase of a movement
is generally the principal phrase or theme (Hauptsatz, Thema; 2, pp. 347—

Koch: A Comprehensive Approach to Structure

295


=== PAGE 306 ===

296

348; Baker 1983, p. 3). Likewise, the third period “begins most frequently
with the theme, but sometimes also with another principal melodic idea”
(mit einem andern melodischen Haupttheile; 3, p. 311; Baker 1983,
p. 201). “Another principal melodic idea” probably refers to the beginning
of music in the contrasting key in period 1, because earlier, Koch had
explained that a movement features “a principal idea [Hauptgedank] con-
nected to a subsidiary idea [Nebengedank] which leads to another principal
idea” (2, p. 98). In fact, Koch specifies precisely where “another principal
melodic idea” might occur within the first period. He recognizes that the
arrival on the second key area is commonly the point at which a lyrical
theme appears: “quite often one hears no absolutely clear phrase ending
[keinen formlichen Absatz; no clear ending of an inconclusive phrase] until
rushing and sonorous phrases are replaced by a more singing phrase [ein
mehr singbarer Satz], usually performed at a lower dynamic level. Thus
one finds quite a few such [first] periods in which an absolutely clear
phrase ending is not heard until the piece has been led into the most closely
related key” (3, p. 306; Baker 1983, p. 199). Koch also refers in two other
passages to “the singing phrase [cantabler Satz] after the phrase ending
on scale-step 5 in the key on 5” (3, pp. 334, 385; Baker 1983, p. 210,
230).

A further thematic aspect recognized by Koch is the transposition of the
themes stated in the nontonic key in period 1 to the tonic key in period
3. “The second half of the first period, or those melodic ideas which
followed the cadence on scale-degree 5 in the key on 5, is repeated in the
principal key” (3, p. 311; Baker 1983, p. 201).

As a result, Koch’s full view of the structure of allegros recognizes several
separate structural aspects: the tonal orientation of periods throughout
their length, the cadential orientation of periods, connections between
periods, and thematic content and function. These issues—tonal structure,
cadences, and themes—are in fact the primary features dealt with by later
theory. But Koch relates these features in a manner quite different from
later theory. First, nineteenth-century theorists viewed thematic contrast
as a primary determinant of sonata form. There is thematic contrast within
the exposition, heightened by tonal contrast. In the recapitulation, the
return of the contrasting theme in the tonic key assuages these contrasts.
Although Koch does deal with the placement of themes and is aware of
the presence of contrasting themes (rushing versus singing phrases) within
the first period, he never mentions thematic contrast as an issue needing
resolution in a movement. In addition, nowhere in Koch’s discussion of
allegros does he make a strong statement about contrast of any type—
theme or tonality—within the first period. For Koch, the first period of
the movement is a single unit, not a dichotomous entity.

Additionally, a thematic view of sonata form often regards the devel-

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 307 ===

opment section as a place where the themes are taken apart, prior to their
restatement in a form close to their original presentation in the recapitu-
lation. This promotes the view that the exposition and recapitulation are
the relatively stable parts of the form supporting the variable development
in the middle. But Koch does not view the overall dynamic of the form in
this way. He does recognize that period 3 (corresponding to the recapi-
tulation) is a stable section. But its stability derives from its tonal structure,
from the fact that the closing period “is primarily in the principal key of
the piece because thus far this key has been heard only a little in the
execution of the movement” (2, pp. 224-225). Because it is grounded in
the tonic, period 3 thus stands in contrast to both the first and second
periods—both of which end away from the tonic—not merely the second
part of period 1.

Indeed, Koch’s view of the stability of period 3 in contrast to the first
two periods offers a perspective that differs not only from a thematic
perspective on sonata form but also from the harmonic perspective that
is in vogue nowadays. To repeat, Koch contrasts the tonal stability of
period 3 with the mobile character of both periods 1 and 2; he regards
period 1 as a single unit, not as two units, one in the principal key and
one elsewhere, that need to be reconciled.

Compositional Method

Koch’s thoughts on complete movements are related to his ideas on com-
positional method, set forth in the extended essay “on the nature of
composition” (von der Entstehungsart der Tonstticke) that opens Volume
2.16 Koch builds on ideas in the articles on general aesthetic issues written
by Johann Georg Sulzer (1720-1779) for his encyclopedia, Allgemeine
Theorie der schénen Ktinste (1771-1774). Sulzer’s ideas as they pertain
to music are in turn partly based on Mattheson’s Der vollkommene Ca-
pellmeister (1739) and the influential Les beaux-arts réduits a un méme
principe (1746) by the French aesthetician Charles Batteux (1713-1780),
which was translated into German in 1758 by the Berlin poet Karl Ramler
(1725-1798).

As elsewhere, Koch generally steers clear of abstractions. He suggests
that composing a musical work occurs in three stages: a plan (Anlage), its
execution (Ausfiihrung), and its elaboration (Ausarbeitung). This notion,
adopted from Sulzer, is similar to Mattheson’s dispositio, elaboratio, and
decoratio, itself drawn from classical rhetoric, where it pertains to the
composition of a speech. The plan contains a work’s main ideas and

16. Baker 1977 is the most extensive discussion in English on this aspect of Koch’s
writings.

Koch: A Comprehensive Approach to Structure

297


=== PAGE 308 ===

298

harmonic accompaniment in the first stage of creation. The execution and
elaboration are later stages of the compositional process.

Koch never fully specifies exactly what any of these stages would con-
tain, although he does present his own plan for an aria by Graun (2,
pp. 60—62 and following discussion). This plan is not an outline of the
entire aria. Rather, like the original version of the period in Example 11-
14, it contains only a single period that begins in the principal key and
ends in the dominant. Unlike the original period in Example 11-14, how-
ever, Koch’s plan for this aria is much more detailed in that it contains
recognizable themes from the completed aria, not merely a condensation
of the essential motions of a section, as in Example 11-14. The act of
composing the sections missing from the plan presumably belongs to the
execution of the plan.

The plan lacks many features of the finished work, such as expansions
within the given period and also all those sections that are derived from
the first period but not present in it. In many movement constructions,
the sections missing from the plan are the later periods. Thus in an allegro
(corresponding to what we know as sonata form), the music in period 1
is the source for much of period 3 and also many of the ideas in period
2. But in some constructions, such as concerto allegros and arias, the plan
corresponds not to the music that opens the movement, but rather to the
music in a later section. In a concerto allegro, the plan is the basic content
of the first solo section. Thus, the opening music of the movement—the
opening ritornello—is derived from the plan but is not actually present in
it. When the teenaged Wolfgang Mozart transformed keyboard sonatas of
J. C. Bach into concertos, he proceeded in just this fashion (Rosen 1980,
pp. 73-76). He used the first period of the sonata allegros as the direct
basis of the first solo in the concerto and derived the ritornello from
materials in that solo.”

Koch does not specify how or whether the plan relates to appreciation
of the finished piece. If, as Carl Dahlhaus argues, Koch regards the plan
as the essence of a piece, then in a concerto movement, for instance, the
results of viewing the music from the perspective of the plan stand in stark
opposition to the results of a thematic view. From a thematic view we
might regard a concerto movement built from its opening themes; but the
opening ritornello and its themes do not even appear in Koch’s plan.
However, Koch suggests the plan as a path toward composition, not as a
perspective through which the finished piece is to be viewed. Furthermore,
Koch nowhere argues that the plan is heard by the audience of a piece.
For how could listeners know, and what difference would it make, that

17. Stevens 1971 discusses Koch’s views on concertos.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 309 ===

the opening themes they were hearing in a concerto ritornello were con-
ceptually added to the piece after some later music had been worked out?

Concluding Remarks

This survey of Koch’s theories concludes this historical chronicle. Koch’s
works draw together many of the theoretical traditions of the eighteenth
century. He assembled notions of counterpoint, thoroughbass, harmony,
melody, phrasing, what we call musical form, and compositional process
into a more coherent universal view of musical structure than that achieved
by any other theorist of the age. If his work bypasses some of the aspects
of contrapuntal theory that were more thoroughly explored by Fux and
others, that probably reflects the diminished presence of contrapuntal
surface textures in the music of his generation. If his work does not deal
explicitly with the root-progression aspect of harmony, this reflects the
continuing influence of thoroughbass thinking on harmony in the works
of Marpurg, which were the primary influence on harmony in Koch and
many other German musicians of the time. His perspective is at once
individual in the sense that it represents the thinking of one musician, and
universal in the sense that it draws upon all the major theoretical themes
of the time. Despite the lack of a direct influence from Koch to many later
theorists, his agenda became that of many of the principal nineteenth-
century theorists.

Koch: A Comprehensive Approach to Structure

299


=== PAGE 310 ===

Epilogue

IF THERE IS A THEME to this study, it is the remarkable diversity of
theoretical traditions within the eighteenth century and their extraordi-
narily complex interactions. Previous studies parsed the traditions of the
time much more simply. Shirlaw drew a line between harmonic theory
and thoroughbass tradition. Likewise, many Schenkerian theorists draw a
line between harmonic theory on one side and the traditions of thorough-
bass and species counterpoint on the other. These dichotomies do not
stand up to critical scrutiny. There are a great number of features linking
Rameauian ideas and those of the thoroughbass methods. And musicians
of the time found no close affinity between species counterpoint and
thoroughbass. Furthermore, considering eighteenth-century writings ac-
cording to the three traditions of species counterpoint, thoroughbass, and
harmony omits many important works of the age: the melodic studies of
Mattheson, Riepel, and Koch, the different interpretations of counterpoint
from Niedt through Kirnberger and Koch, and what might be called
general composition texts such as Mattheson’s Der vollkommene Capell-
meister. All these traditions are interrelated, with writers continually bor-
rowing tenets that we most closely associate with one tradition in works
that primarily deal with another.

Simplistic divisions of the theoretical traditions of the time have often
led to interpretations of eighteenth-century ideas along the lines of twen-
tieth-century theoretical disputes. The notion of a split between those
theorists who thought of music vertically and those who thought linearly,
for example, may be germane to the differences between Schenkerian and
Riemannian perspectives in the twentieth century. But it hardly applies to
the differences among theorists in the eighteenth century. Eighteenth-cen-
tury applications of species counterpoint, for instance, frequently incor-
porated harmonic thinking, whether in the form of Fux’s discussions of
triads and inversions and of rules for unfigured basses, or of the more
thoroughgoing harmonic approaches of Mozart and Albrechtsberger. And
theorists adopting a Rameauian approach—Nichelmann, for instance—


=== PAGE 311 ===

imply a more comprehensive notion of complex diminutions than any
contrapuntal theorist of the age.

In short, the interactions within and among theoretical traditions of the
eighteenth century are both much more complex and much richer than
has hitherto been imagined. It is my hope that from this more compre-
hensive perspective, the eighteenth century will be viewed less as an arena
in which good theorists riding white horses who stand for a favored
modern perspective did battle with bad theorists riding black horses who
stand for perspectives that are now out of favor. Instead it will be recog-
nized that modern ideas have been nourished by a wide range of theoretical
traditions.

Einstein once suggested that our knowledge might be likened to a circle
of light amid the surrounding darkness of our ignorance. As we increase
our knowledge and thereby increase the diameter of the circle of light, the
circumference representing our awareness of the surrounding darkness
grows geometrically. The present study, which I hope increases that circle
of light, makes it all the more imperative that we learn much more about
areas of eighteenth-century theory that have hardly been explored at all
to date. One of these is the relationship between improvisation and com-
position as composition methods and models changed. From earlier eras
until the seventeenth century, vocal improvisation (both polyphonic im-
provisation against a given part and ornamentation of a completed com-
position) was an important part of a composer’s training. During the
seventeenth century, thoroughbass improvisation—realizing bass parts as
well as preluding, fantasizing, and even improvising complete pieces—
largely replaced vocal improvisation in providing compositional models.
To what extent did this affect compositional theory and practice during
and after the seventeenth century? And what happened to compositional
process when the galant style put a new focus on melodic articulations
and phrase expansions that seem to be less directly related to real-time
improvisation? Was improvisation inspired by galant melody as much a
part of compositional method in the new styles as thoroughbass improv-
isation had been earlier in the century?

Likewise, a virtually unknown body of compositional pedagogy awaits
exploration. The relatively few items that have surfaced (manuscripts of
J. S. Bach compositions from the Leipzig circle with analytic annotations;
the studies of Mozart’s students in composition) have revealed that meth-
ods as they appeared in published works were applied rather freely in
pedagogical situations. Even the existence of other similar pedagogical
source materials is barely known. Are there extant student exercises from
those who studied with Rameau, with Kirnberger, or with Koch? What
do they show?

Epilogue

301


=== PAGE 312 ===

302

Finally, a host of less wide-ranging issues await attention. For instance,
the transmission of ideas and approaches needs to be much better docu-
mented. The spread of Rameau’s theories to Germany is one such topic.
An informative review of his 1722 Traité appeared in Leipzig in 1723; at
least two German theorists (Christoph Schréter and his teacher Johann
Nicolaus Bach) worked through the treatise in 1724; and Heinichen prob-
ably adopted some of its ideas for his 1728 thoroughbass manual. Yet
many scholars assert that Rameau’s ideas remained virtually unknown for
more than nearly three decades. Once again, hitherto unexplored manu-
script sources may help to round out the picture.

As the eighteenth century recedes ever farther into the past, its repertoire
(the works of Bach and Handel, Couperin and Rameau, Vivaldi and the
Scarlattis, Haydn and Mozart, early Beethoven, and a host of others) will
be kept alive as it remains meaningful to our own times. It will remain
important to interpret that legacy and its structural bases in ways that
inform us how and why the music remains alive to us in the present. At
the same time, it is important to maintain a focus on how the structural
bases of this music were conceived by its own time. A step toward that
goal is the study of compositional theory in the eighteenth century.

Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century


=== PAGE 313 ===

Appendixes
Bibliography

Index


=== PAGE 314 ===

BLANK PAGE


=== PAGE 315 ===

APPENDIX ONE

Rameau, Nouveau systéme de musique theorique
(1726): Chapter 23, “Examples of Errors
Found in the Figures of Corelli’s op. 5”

All emphases and capitalizations are Rameau’s. Cross-references to other
sections of the Nouveau systéme are omitted. Also omitted is Rameau’s
explanation of various abbreviations he uses to refer to the movements.
The annotations in brackets following many paragraphs highlight impor-
tant issues. These annotations often use modern terminology instead of
Rameau’s. Numbers in brackets are page numbers in the original. Accord-
ing to Lee Brentlinger, who is studying the transmission of Corelli’s op. 5,
Rameau’s source for these pieces was undoubtedly a French manuscript,
not a published edition. The thoroughbass figures he cites agree with no
published edition, but are close to those in a Parisian edition of the 1730s
by LeClerc.

[95] We shall see by placing the Fundamental Bass beneath Corelli’s Basso
Continuo the true chords which must be found there as a consequence of
the Connection [Liaison] that the fundamental progression of a Fifth must
support most naturally within each harmonic Motion [Modulation]. This
progression [of a fifth] can only be broken off after a principal Tone [a
tonic chord], except in the case of broken or interrupted Cadences.
(Rameau insists that all progressions in the fundamental bass (all root
progressions) follow the pattern of cadences: root progression down by a
fifth in a perfect cadence, up by a fifth in an irregular cadence, up by step
in a broken cadence (cadence rompué), or down by third in an interrupted
cadence (cadence interrompué). In each of these cadences, the first chord
is dissonant: a seventh chord in the perfect, broken, and interrupted
cadence; an added-sixth chord in the irregular cadence. (Note that a 6
above a note in the fundamental bass refers to an added-sixth chord, not
to a first-inversion triad.) Among these cadences, the perfect and irregular,


=== PAGE 316 ===

306

B.C. § 3 6 4
2 i= =

B ( D

F.B: 7 7 7 u

2 eee

Example A1-1. Sonata No. 1, first Allegro, m. 5; mm. 9—10

in which the root progression is by fifth, are the models for other pro-
gressions. Only after a tonic chord may the fundamental bass move freely. ]

We will see that Corelli, when he figured the Chords that this Bass must
carry, was guided much less by knowledge than by the Intervals that his
ear made him use between the Violin [Dessus] and the Bass.

{Rameau stresses that he is not criticizing the compositions, which he
regards as the result of Corelli’s genius, but the thoroughbass figures that
Corelli added to the completed composition. Rameau states this position
repeatedly during the chapter. He thereby implies that he views working
out the voices of a composition as an act distinct from and prior to the
application of thoroughbass figures.]

Since the source of the Harmony is the same in these two different
progressions A-B and C-D [in Example A1-1], consequently the Notes A
and C must be figured the same. But Corelli seems to have judged them
only according to the Violin, which makes a Sixth and Fifth from Note
A, while it only makes a Sixth from Note C. The same problem appears
in numerous other passages in the same Allegro and elsewhere.

[Two issues are involved here: Explicitly, Rameau criticizes Corelli’s
inconsistency. Implicitly, Rameau favors the first figuring because he be-
lieves that a proper approach to a dominant-seventh chord (a dominant-
tonic in his terminology) is a root progression down by fifth from a seventh
chord, not a root progression up by step from a triad. There are two
reasons for his position. First, he believes that a triad (on scale-step 4)
would imply the stability of a temporary tonic arrival on that scale step.
Second, a seventh chord built on scale-step 2 allows a root progression by
fifth imitating a perfect cadence, which is for him a stronger motion than
a root-progression up by step which might imitate a broken cadence.]

[97] Although one could give a 6/4 Chord to Note A [in Example A1-
2], conforming to the Fundamental Bass indicated by a custos below Note
A, the 4/2 Chord that Corelli figured elsewhere is even more apt, conform-
ing to the Fundamental-Bass Note placed below Note A. This is because
we are in the Key of D, and not at all in the Key of G, which 6/4 represents.

Appendix 1


=== PAGE 317 ===

BO

™
ia
9
Hel. 4

4
3
72
=
N
6

Example A1-2. Other examples on the same topic [that when Corelli added figures,
he was guided primarily by the intervals between the violin and the bass]:
Sonata No. 1, first Adagio; Sonata No. 1, first Allegro, mm. 29-30;

Sonata No. 1, first Allegro, mm. 38-39; Sonata No. 1, second Adagio, mm. 23-24;
Sonata No. 2, first Adagio, mm. 8—9; Sonata No. 3, first Allegro, m. 28;
Sonata No. 10, first Adagio, m. 17

[Two issues influence Rameau’s argument. Explicitly, the 6/4 represents
a triad, hence a tonic. This 6/4 therefore implies for Rameau the key of
G, which contradicts the prevailing key of D major. In addition, as already
noted, Rameau prefers a descending fifth in the fundamental bass to
approach the dominant.]

6/4 must be figured above Note C to indicate the perfect Chord of the
principal Tone, which must naturally follow the Dominant heard at Note
B. This 6/4 is even more necessary because Note D is in the Chord of that
principal Tone and not at all in the Chord of the Dominant.

[For Rameau, the F# and D on the second beat imply a B-minor tonic
triad that resolves the dominant, thereby creating a quarter-note harmonic
rhythm. Corelli’s figuring implies a half-note harmonic rhythm with a
neighboring chord between two dominants, and with the bass D as a
rather complex dissonance functioning as a dominant of the G. See Ex-
ample Ar1-3.]

If Note L is figured correctly, then Notes G and J are figured incorrectly,
since each of these notes has a different fundamental bass.

Appendix 1

etc,

etc.

etc.

etc.

307


=== PAGE 318 ===

308

Example A1-3.

Note L represents the principal Tone; Note G makes the Fifth of a
Dominant [i.e., of a seventh chord], and Note J makes the third [of a
Dominant]. Thus, each of these Notes must be figured in relation to the
Chord of the fundamental Tone that they represent [i.e., in relation to the
root of that chord], conforming to the style of figuring adopted by Corelli.
Consequently, 6/4 must be figured for a Note a Fifth above a principal
Tone [i.e., a fifth above the root of a chord], as at L; 4/3 for a Note which
is a Fifth above a Dominant or a Third above a Subdominant [i.e., a fifth
above the root of a seventh chord or a third above the root of an added-
sixth chord], as at N; and 6/5 for a note a Third above a Dominant, as
at A in [Example Ar-1].

[As in preceding examples, Rameau implies that a triad is improper for
note G because the chord is not a tonic. Rameau addresses note J again
on his p. 98.]

If Note P is figured correctly, then Note E and also Note C in [Example
A1-1] are figured incorrectly, because each of these Notes represents a
different fundamental Tone, or at least is a different distance [from the
fundamental Tone]. Consequently, 6 must be figured for a Note which is
the Third of a principal Tone, as at P; 4/3 for a Note which is the Fifth
of a Dominant, such as Note E; and 6/5 for a Note which is the Third of
a Dominant, such as Note C in [Example Ar-1].

[As in preceding examples, Rameau implies that a triad is improper for
note E in Example Ar-2 and note C in Ar-1 because the chord is not a
tonic.]

If 4/3 is figured correctly at N, then it is incorrect at M. Even worse,
the Chord at M designated 4/3# is worthless. It is from this very type of
error that one can judge the difference that existed between knowledge
and feeling in such an excellent musician as Corelli.

If that Composer had known that of two Stepwise Notes that fill one
single Beat of the Measure [such as the D# and E above Note M] one is
the master in deciding which Note one wishes to have carry the Harmony,
he would have seen that of the two Notes of the Violin that go along with
Note M, that which makes the Fourth [over the Bass] should have been
chosen for the Harmony. He would have felt it himself if he had been able

Appendix 1


=== PAGE 319 ===

Example A1-4. Sonata No. 9, second Allegro, mm. 12-13

to think about it. And he would have had no doubt if he had known of
the Fundamental Bass, from which he would have been convinced that he
had to figure that Note M with a 6/4, and not with a 4/3#, which has not
even a shadow of the Harmony.

[Rameau reads the progression from X-M as an irregular cadence. Hence
he only wants a 6/4 chord over note M. Once again, Rameau acknowledges
Corelli’s genius in composing the sonatas at the same time that he faults
Corelli for not understanding his own composition well enough to figure
it properly.]

[98] The same error is found in [Example A1-4].

The Violin alone should have informed Corelli that Note Q carries no
Harmony, and that on the contrary it is Note R that carries the Harmony.
Consequently, the 7/5 figured on Note Q is worthless.

{Rameau implies here that notes not part of the harmony—nonharmonic
tones in our modern terminology—should not be given figures. Thus,
instead of Corelli’s thoroughbass figures, which here simply tell the per-
former what to play, Rameau wants a notation that will indicate the
functional harmony. Perhaps he was already thinking ahead to his proposal
published in 1732 that thoroughbass figuring should be replaced with a
notation that listed the chord roots and chord types. In such a notation,
many problematic figurings that arise from the presence of nonharmonic
tones in the bass would never arise; see the reference to figured Melody
two paragraphs below.]

It must also be noted in [Example Ar-2] that the 6/4 figured on Note J
is even more incorrect [than was discussed above], since the Dissonance
represented by Note H is not resolved until Note K. Therefore Note J
must carry the same Chord as Note H; instead of 6/4, 6/5 must be figured
there according to the Fundamental Bass.

When Corelli employed the harmony of an irregular Cadence from N
to P in [Example A1-2] (as can be recognized by the Sixth added to the
perfect Chord of the Subdominant, which then descends immediately by

Appendix 1

309


=== PAGE 320 ===

310

a Fourth in the Fundamental Bass), he could well have anticipated that
the same Cadence takes place from X to M in [Example A1-2] and from
Q to S in [Example A1-4]. But when one does not know the source of the
Harmony, the figured Melody [Chant figuré] sometimes disguises it so
much that the Ear can be fooled, as one sees here.

And if one wished to go by the most perfect progression in the Funda-
mental Bass at Note F in [Example A1-2], one would see that Note F must
instead be figured with a 9 rather than with a 7, since the Note stipulating
the 9 would have been expressly written in the Fundamental Bass, while
only a custos would have marked the note which stipulates the 7.

The 7 which the Fundamental Bass stipulates at Note F introduces an
imitation of the interrupted Cadence into [the piece],! whereas the 9 that
[the Fundamental Bass] stipulates there introduces an imitation of the
perfect Cadence. Now this is not a Harmonic Connection where the Key
changes, which must happen in interrupted Cadences. Moreover, when
interrupted Cadences are thus used [where there is no key change], this is
done more by accident and involuntarily than by knowledge.

[For Rameau, an interrupted cadence (motion from a seventh chord
down by third to another seventh chord, such as G’ to E’) always indicates
a change of key, however temporary. Since there is no key change here,
Rameau rejects this cadence as a possible explanation for the progression.]

People who accompany on the Clavecin will be able to see that the 9 is
much easier to use here than the 7, and if it did not require such a detailed
digression, we would also give a reason for it much more satisfactory than
that of the Connection within the same Key. Corelli’s Works are full of
this little fault, [99] which has rightfully been deemed less important than
the beauties which abound there.

[Perhaps Rameau’s “much more satisfactory reason” is that “chords by
subposition serve only to suspend sounds which should be heard naturally”
(Rameau 1722, Book 3, Chapter 31). Hence, explaining note F as a
subposed ninth chord defines the role of the notes in this chord more
fully.]

Example on Another Topic. [Example A1-5]?

The Dot of Note A, which syncopates that Note, carries a Harmony.
Because of that, Corelli figured it with a 5/2. But that Note A, which
therefore represents the Dissonance and which has already sounded with
the Leading Tone B, cannot exist together with Note C which is the

1. Rameau writes broken Cadence (Cadence rompué) throughout this paragraph, clearly
an error for interrupted Cadence (Cadence interrompué).
2. The third note in the fundamental bass is an A in the original.

Appendix 1


=== PAGE 321 ===

Example A1-5. Sonata No. 2, first Adagio, m. 7

principal Tone announced by the Leading Tone; for no Dissonance may
exist in the chord where it is to be resolved. Thus that Syncopation Note
A is out of place in such a case. The Fundamental Bass allows us to see
that the Note which follows A ought to be at the place of the Dot A.

[For Rameau, the term Dissonance here refers to suspensions. Hence
his explanation that “all Dissonances cannot exist in the chord where they
must be resolved.”]

Therefore note well that sometimes the Intervals used by Corelli between
the Violin and Bass, sometimes habit, as with that ill-conceived Synco-
pation in [Example A1-5] (for this Composer was particularly fond of
Syncopation), and sometimes his Ear all guided him in his figures much
more than his understanding; for the same Chord that he might have seen
between the Violin and the Bass, or that he was in the habit of figuring
in a certain manner, or that his Ear made him perceive in certain passages
issued forth from him more often than he hit upon [the right chord for
the right reasons], leaving aside the familiar Chords with which even the
weakest Musicians do not make errors. But we will not stop there, instead
going on to other remarks no less important than the preceding.

(Here Rameau reverses his earlier stance and criticizes the written parts
for being guided by the figuring. It is not clear why Rameau finds the
suspended Bb so troublesome and does not merely regard it as a 4-3
suspension and/or as part of a subposed chord.]

For example, what can one think of the manner of figuring many Notes
that rise by Step [Diatoniquement; Example A1-6], where nearly all the
5s and 6s must indicate a different Chord, according to [Example A1-7].

[100] Corelli knew of all these last figures to designate the very Chords

5656 G8 yi

B # £ fF : etc.

Example A1-6.

Appendix 1


=== PAGE 322 ===

Example A1-7.

that are set down in the Fundamental Bass. Undoubtedly, if he had rec-
ognized these Chords, he would have figured them there as he did
elsewhere.

Corelli’s manner of figuring [in Ex. A1-6] is an evasion which almost
all Musicians make use of quite willingly, and on account of their using
it, one can accuse them of not knowing what they have practiced in such
cases.

[However useful Rameau’s insistence on seeing all chordal connections
as cadences or imitated cadences may be in explaining many progressions,
it is hopelessly inadequate in sequential motions as in Example Ar-6. In
his contorted attempt to deal with this progression, Rameau even violates
his usual practice of avoiding syncopated harmonic rhythm by tying the
G-seventh chord over the first barline.]

There is another thing to take note of in this Composer: when he uses
some quarter-note rests in his Basso Continuo, he does not indicate the
Chord that must be played during that rest [Example A1-8].

If the rest followed a principal Tone, there would be nothing to say in
such a case. But since this rest is between two Dissonances, of which the
first must be resolved and of which the second must be prepared, one
cannot then dispense with sounding the Harmony that exists during that
rest.

Since it is up to the Accompaniment to furnish the source of the Har-
mony, it is absolutely obligatory always to make the necessary Connection
felt there. Without this Connection a defective gap is found there, at least
in a passage where the rest not only interrupts the necessary Connection,

F.B.: 7777

Example A1-8. Sonata No. 6, first Allegro, m. 42

Appendix 1


=== PAGE 323 ===

a

6
} ‘b
= Ss eT.
pe oe z —
A OD

~ adlllua w
=alll]]

me
z Hi.

&
J

Example A1-9. Sonata No. 7, first Allegro, mm. 26-31

but destroys it. This is so because the [proper] manner of laying out a
Basso Continuo can never suspend that Connection.

{Here Rameau criticizes a common feature of thoroughbass figuring that
does not provide a full accounting of the harmonic structure of a passage.
Once again, he seems to be looking ahead to his 1732 proposal for a new
system of chord labeling to replace thoroughbass figures.]

See [Example Ar1-9] on the same topic.

({102] The first Fundamental Bass ends here in the Key of F major at A,
and resumes immediately afterward in D minor at D, which is related to
it.

The second Fundamental Bass maintains the Key of D minor by means
of an irregular Cadence between G and H.

The third Fundamental Bass once again maintains the Key of D minor
by means of an interrupted Cadence between J and L.

Note here that one can cause a listener to confuse the irregular Cadence
G-H and the imitation of the perfect [Cadence] L-M. The first Note of
each of these Cadences (G and L) gives the same harmonic source. But by
virtue of the Cadences that they announce, one can take either one or the
other as fundamental.

{Rameau here explains the essentials of double emploi without using
that term.]

Not one of the three types of Harmony indicated by these three Fun-
damental Basses is announced to us by Corelli’s figuring; but let us return
to the beginning of the Example.

Appendix 1

313


=== PAGE 324 ===

314

The first rest can be realized as is, because the [preceding] Connection
ends there on the principal Tone.

The other rests cannot do without the source of the Harmony which
must support the Connection there.

In any case, if one could provide a Connection during this example
solely by means of the Chords that Corelli figured, we would be wrong
to condemn him. But note well that according to the Connection of the
Basso Continuo Melody and that of the Violin, only the Key [Modulation]
of D can be understood, and that that Key is absolutely destroyed by the
Chord figured at N, which according to the Violin must impart to us the
Key of F.

We do not insist on this source of the Key, if it could be brought about
and followed by a Connection relative to that of the Melody. But on the
contrary, one cannot follow Corelli’s figuring thereby considering the
Violin line, without sounding some unprepared minor Dissonances [chord
sevenths], or without imitating a broken Cadence, while the Melody gives
no occasion for such a cadence.

{Rameau insists, as he did in connection with Example A1-6, that what
Corelli marks as a sequential progression must be interpreted in terms of
cadential progressions. When he speaks of unprepared chord sevenths that
would arise by following Corelli’s figures, he may be referring to the
progression from measure 29 to measure 30: even if the end of measure
29 is read as an F-major triad, Rameau would insist that the E-diminished
triad in measure 30 represents a C dominant-seventh chord with an un-
prepared Bb. When Rameau speaks of imitating a broken Cadence, he is
referring to the progression from measure 30 to measure 31, in which
Corelli’s figures imply a C-seventh chord (because a diminished triad is
for Rameau the upper portion of a dominant-seventh chord) moving to a
D-minor triad.] .

Should Musicians sensitive to the Harmony try to accompany Corelli’s
Basso Continuo by considering the Violin, they will soon sense its flaw
and will acknowledge the necessity of filling in the rests there according
to the Harmony announced by the Fundamental Bass.

See [Example A1-10] on the same topic.

[103] It must be noted here (and this must be applied to the preceding
Example as well) that in every Melody that touches two Strings of the
same Harmony (which one calls an arpeggio [Batterie]), [each Note of the
Melody] is expected to remain on the same String that it leaves [when it]
passes to the other note. Otherwise the Dissonance which can appear next
would be intolerable, having only been prepared, in this case, by the String
where the Sound has not remained until that Dissonance.

Thus the String (i.e., Note A of the Violin) is expected to remain until
the Dissonance D which it prepares. It remains to note that D makes a

Appendix 1


=== PAGE 325 ===

=.

Example A1-10. Sonata No. 5, first Allegro, mm. 59-62

Dissonance with M which here represents the Basso Continuo and even
the Fundamental Bass.

Thus, the Dissonance D will be resolved on the Consonance G; at the
same time that Consonance G prepares the Dissonance H, which will be
resolved on the Consonance I, and that in turn prepares the Dissonance
L, etc.

[Along with many thoroughbass writers, Rameau here notes that in an
arpeggiation one must follow each line within the arpeggiation and not
necessarily the note-to-note sequence in order to understand properly the
preparation and resolution of dissonances.]

One can judge from these remarks that Corelli’s figuring is worthless
{here] and that he absolutely did not understand what his Ear made him
apply successfully in this passage, for because the Dissonance D is expected
to remain until the Consonance G which resolves it, Note N had to be
figured with a 7 and not with a 6; and the following Note P should have
been figured with the Chord that resolves, in this case, with the Seventh.
The same goes for Notes Q, R, etc.

The rests can take place in the Harmony of the last Example, [104] by
inserting the Basso Continuo figured in our manner there. For the rests
only serve to delay [suspendre] the Connection without destroying it.

One cannot say that this is a misprint here, for it is repeated in the text
in two consecutive Measures, and it is in the piece in the form of a series
of three or four Measures figured in the same manner; and it does not
seem that the intention was to figure a Chord on each quarter-note there,
as should have happened, and as in fact happens in the two Measures
preceding those in this example.

Example on Another Topic [Example A1-11]

In these last two examples there is a Connection that terminates only on
the 6 that follows the 7 at Note G, as one can also learn from the melody

Appendix 1

315


=== PAGE 326 ===

316

G

F.B.:

25

oHtl||-~

Bay

as

>

Example A1-11. Sonata No. 5, second Adagio, mm. 10-11 and 25-26

of the Violin in the Composer’s score. The leading Tone which announces
the end of this Connection is marked there precisely by a sharp or a
natural; thus there must not be any Chords between that of the Dominant
A and that of the principal Tone D. Nevertheless, Corelli figures one new
[Chord] between that of the Dominant A and that of the principal Tone
D in the first passage, and two.new Chords in the other. What does one
conclude from such an error?

If Corelli really meant to claim that the Chord figured with a 7 on the
Notes labelled G was the same as the Chord on the Dominants at Notes
A, he could have easily seen that this 7 in no way indicated such a Chord.
Moreover, seeing as he was careful to mark the leading Tone everywhere
with a sharp or with a natural (which must indicate the leading Tone),
how would he have forgotten this here if he had been aware that the
leading Tone must remain in the Harmony until the principal Tone, D at
Note D?

Musicians who care about consecutive Octaves would perhaps not wish
to allow the Ninth to be used here on a Note that descends immediately
by Step. But isn’t the source of the Harmony the most advisable? And if
one can attribute to error the Harmony that we indicate here, then the
fault is in the Basso Continuo [105] and not at all in the source which
cannot be excluded from it. In any case, let us reject all scruples when
considering a Composition that pleases us; and let us wait until we know
perfectly the principle of our rules before basing any judgement on these
rules.

[In that Rameau’s fundamental bass remains on scale-step 5 under each
7-6 suspension, he understands each of these suspensions to arise from a
subposed ninth chord. For example, the first chord is for him a D-seventh
chord with a subposed Bb. Within the progression from that suspended
D-seventh chord to the following G-minor triad, an upper voice will
proceed from C-Bb, thereby implying parallel octaves with the immediately
preceding C-Bb in the bass. On a separate topic, note that Rameau figures
the 4-3 suspension in the second passage as a suspension, not as a sub-
posed chord.]

Appendix 1


=== PAGE 327 ===

# f Pe
ca coo

z

etc.

G
F.B.: H 5
BSS Se «

G HJ LJ ic

Example A1-12. Sonata No. 8, first Allegro, mm. 12-14

What does this 6 figured above Note A [in Example A1-12] mean? Is
this how one resolves Dissonances?

[The following discussion concerns the resolution of the A within what
Rameau regards as the implied B-seventh chord over note G.]

Note well the order of the Melody in the Violin, and you will find there
a kind of repose on Note D. However, this repose, which is less noticeable
than that which comes immediately afterwards, is adroitly broken by
Corelli’s Basso Continuo at Note A. But at the same time, this Composer
destroys the effect with his Figuring.

The Seventh figured at Note G must resolve by descending Stepwise to
the first place where the repose announced by the leading Tone that carries
the Dominant G appears. Accordingly, this Seventh must resolve to the
Fifth above Note A; and the Sixth there is worthless.

[Although the details differ, the progression here is similar to the one
that Rameau objects to in the second progression in Example Ar-2. In
both cases, a dominant seventh moves to a 6 chord on the next higher
degree before returning and resolving in a more emphatic manner shortly
thereafter. Even though Rameau recognizes that the resolution of the
dominant from notes G-A is “less noticeable” than the coming cadence (a
remark that could have applied to the progression in Example Ar1-2 as
well), he still insists that the seventh of the dominant chord resolve
properly in the ensuing harmony.]

The Cadence is broken from G to A, or from G to H [in the Fundamental
Bass], and the Cadence is irregular from J to L [both times].

We do not know if the faulty passage indicated here has been taken as
a model, but many Musicians have many fewer scruples about using it
than they have about making two consecutive Octaves.

Such a fault [moving to a 6 chord a step above a dominant seventh]
may be excusable in one situation but not in another. For instance, when-
ever one can assume that the Notes carry no Harmony, or whenever one
separates the Dissonance from the Harmony, provided that the natural

Appendix 1

BY


=== PAGE 328 ===

318

progression of a minor Third does not suffer; in such cases the Sixth
figured on Note A is good.

[When Rameau speaks of the “natural progression of a minor Third,”
he means the usual downward resolution of a chord seventh (because a
chord seventh is the minor dissonance that arises from the addition of a
minor third above a triad). Thus, when he says one can “retake the
Dissonance” instead of resolving the chord seventh, he means sustaining
the seventh of the dominant into the next harmony, as in the progression
from notes G-A. Presumably, such a chord that retakes the chord seventh
without resolving it will then return to the dominant seventh and then
resolve properly. This is, of course, the basis of the progression in the
second passage in Example A1-2, which Rameau censures as well as the
progression here. But in both cases, the simplicity of the progression is
clouded by several other dissonances. It seems that Rameau is objecting
to those complicating factors here, not to the progression itself.]

If we would examine the Works of this Composer for all the omitted
Figures, we would never be done; no less than if we would list all the
passages where the errors that we have just condemned here appear. But
we believe we have said enough to prove that Musicians recognized as the
most skillful are not always free from faults—not in the source of their
compositions (for one can suppose that they are all as sensitive to Harmony
as Corelli seems to have been [judging] by his excellent Works), [106] but
where they are obliged to give proof of their knowledge, such as in the
Figures.

When we compose Music, that is not the time to recall the rules that
could enslave our genius. In composing, we must only have recourse to
the rules when genius and the ear seem to deny us what we seek. But
when we wish to make known to others the source of Harmony that exists
there, and to do that through the Basso Continuo Figures, that is the time
when we must recall these Rules. If these Rules were worthless, our Ear
could hardly protect us from errors to which they subjected us. In this
case, all reason prohibits judging by Ear; and for most Musicians, to
prohibit judging by Ear is to deprive them of all their knowledge.

One must conclude from this Chapter’s argument that whoever only
knows how to Accompany according to the figures does not know Accom-
paniment. For to know Accompaniment, one must be able to correct these
Figures, and consequently one must know Composition in a manner dif-
ferent from they way it has ever been known.

In condemning some Figures by Corelli, we do not claim to thereby
condemn his Works. On the contrary, we have chosen them from all
Works that are among the best in the matter of Harmony in order to make
known that reason and Ear do not always agree among Musicians—not
that they could not be in a state of proving the contrary nowadays.

Appendix 1


=== PAGE 329 ===

Accordingly, our critical remarks apply more to the past than to the
present.

[In these last two sentences, Rameau seems to be taking note of changes
in compositional style between Corelli’s generation and the music of the
1720s. One of these stylistic changes is the gradual reduction in a fast
harmonic rhythm featuring many sequential progressions in favor of a
slower harmonic rhythm featuring more root progressions by fifths. As a
result, from Rameau’s perspective, the progressions that he found most
problematic in the works of Corelli were less common in more recent
music. ]

In debating the value of Science with Musicians, we have at the same
time opened up the paths [to Science] for them. Thus, we soon hope to
see Musicians more animated than ever in the noble rivalry which must
make them distinguish themselves in their Art. In fact, will showing that
they are as capable of illuminating the spirit as amusing the ear not greatly
add to their merit? Hence, let us no longer be lulled by the frivolous
pleasure of the senses; let us carry our ideas even further. For who better
than one who is already experienced in an Art can carry it to its last
degree of perfection? Let us begin now by laying down all prejudice.
Instead of maintaining that our errors are correct, let us take pride in
confessing them. That will yield a first proof of one’s knowledge, that of
acceding to the truth, whereas in opposing it, one remains forever in an
ignorance that is uncovered sooner or later.

Appendix 1

319


=== PAGE 330 ===

APPENDIX TWO

Concerning the Authenticity
of Thoroughbass Methods Attributed
to Albrechtsberger

After living and teaching in Vienna since the 1760s, Johann Georg Al-
brechtsberger turned in 1790 to the publisher Breitkopf in Leipzig to
produce a handsome edition of his 400-page Griindliche Anweisung zur
Composition. In nearly every conceivable way, there are stark contrasts
between this work and the Kurzgefasste Methode den General Bass zu
erlernen that was published without a date (probably 1791) by Artaria in
Vienna and Mainz. The Anweisung is set in type; the Methode is inexpen-
sively hand-engraved. The Anweisung spells out Albrechtsberger’s full
name on the title page; the Methode uses initials for his first and middle
names. The Anweisung uses standard German spellings; the Methode is
replete with Viennese dialect (such as Regin in a heading on page 1). The
Anweisung, like almost all formal works after the middle of the century,
is wholly in German; the Methode is in an antiquated macaronic German
replete with inconsistencies (Sext minor oder Major on p. 5 versus Kleine
Sext on p. 7). The Anweisung uses standard music notation; the Methode
features some unorthodox notations (the key signature for C# major simply
lists all the sharps in a scale in both clefs, p. 4). The Anweisung is
comprehensive and clearly organized; the Methode is quite sketchy and
poorly organized on every level. Sometimes topics run into one another
within paragraphs. Other times a single topic is broken into two para-
graphs, each of which contains other topics. This poor organization is
cited by an anonymous reviewer of a later Leipzig edition who urges
readers seeking a methodical presentation of thoroughbass to look else-
where (Berlinische Musikalische Zeitung, 2 [1806]:52). Briefly put, it is
hard to imagine that Albrechtsberger, who had just produced a work as
well organized and well produced as the Anweisung could have had any-
thing directly to do with the Methode a year later.


=== PAGE 331 ===

The Methode reappeared in several different editions over the next
decades, some entitled Generalbassschule. Some of these are printed (no
longer engraved) and use more standard German spellings (such as an
edition by C. F. Peters in Leipzig, again without a date, in the library of
New York University). But there are still problems with the contents, and
the macaronic German remains (Terz-minor-Sprung, p. 4.)

Additional types of evidence also separate the Methode from the An-
weisung. Thayer’s Life of Beethoven notes that Beethoven’s studies with
Albrechtsberger in the mid-1790s were based on the Anweisung (Forbes
1967, pp. 146-147). But no mention is made of any thoroughbass method
by Albrechtsberger.

Finally, there is the statement of Ignaz Xaver Ritter von Seyfried (1776—
1841), a pupil of Albrechtsberger’s who published a complete edition of
his teacher’s writings (Seyfried [c. 1825]). Although the sections that cor-
respond to Albrechtsberger’s Anweisung faithfully copy that work, the
General-bass-schule that Seyfried included differs substantially in content
from the Methode under discussion here, including quite a bit more har-
monic theory. Seyfried has gained a deserved notoriety for the numerous
inaccuracies in his publication of Beethoven’s student work (Seyfried
1832). But it is hard to question statements he made in the preface to the
1837 edition of his publication of Albrechtsberger’s theoretical works. To
answer the criticism that there were inconsistencies within Albrechtsber-
ger’s teachings, he explained his sources: “The first volume, the General-
bass-schule, had to be compiled almost from scratch [schlechterdings bey-
nahe neu erschaffen werden] since only a very small portion of the nec-
essary materials existed. On the other hand, Albrechtsberger completed in
his own hand with the greatest precision the material of the last two parts,
the Anweisung zur Composition” (Seyfried [1837], preface). Surely Sey-
fried knew of the Methode and Generalbassschule; he must have had some
reasons to doubt that it represented Albrechtsberger’s teaching of
thoroughbass.

Thus, there are substantial reasons to doubt that Albrechtsberger had
much to do with any of the editions of the Methode. Possibly, the Viennese
publisher Artaria, seeing the success of the Anweisung, located a Viennese
pupil of Albrechtsberger (quite possibly someone who had studied with
him years earlier) and published a compendium assembled from that
student’s notes. Once the work had been published in the late-eighteenth-
century world without copyright restrictions, it assumed a life of its own,
probably in a manner quite similar to the thoroughbass manual falsely
ascribed to Mozart, which has repeatedly been published under Mozart’s
name, most recently in the 1950s in New York.

Appendix 2

321


=== PAGE 332 ===

BLANK PAGE


=== PAGE 333 ===

Bibliography

This is not a comprehensive bibliography for eighteenth-century theory. Only
primary and secondary literature on music cited in the course of this study appears
here. Thus, standard encyclopedia entries, such as those in MGG or The New
Grove, may be important sources of information, but they are listed only if
explicitly cited in the text. Many eighteenth-century titles have been shortened.
Original spellings are retained for all names and titles, except that capitalization
has been changed to conform to standard practice, and umlauts over capital letters
have been changed to an e after the vowel with the umlaut. A date in brackets
indicates that in the publication the date is absent from the title page (or copyright
page for modern works) or that the date on the title page is not accurate. Facsimiles
(Facs.) are photocopies of the original; reprints are reset in type from the original.
Translations appear under the translator’s name, with both original and transla-
tion cross-referenced. Publishers are not listed for works before 1900.

Adlung, Jacob. 1758. Anleitung zu der musikalischen Gelabrtheit. Erfurt. Facs.
Kassel: Barenreiter, 1953.

Agricola, Johann Friedrich. 1786. “Beleuchtung der Frage von dem Vorzuge der
Melodie vor der Harmonie.” Magazin der Musik 2:809-829. Facs. Hildes-
heim: Olms, 1971. :

Albert, Heinrich. 1643. Ander Theil der Arien. Konigsberg.

Albrechtsberger, Johann Georg. 1790. Griindliche Anweisung zur Composition
... zum Selbstunterrichte. Leipzig. Editions and translations into French and
English, 1814-1834. Partial English transl. in Mann 1965b.

? [c. 1791]. Kurzgefasste Methode den Generalbass zu erlernen. Vienna,
Mainz. Editions, some entitled Generalbaf-schule, through 1822. See Appen-
dix 2 concerning authorship.

D’Alembert, Jean le Rond. 1752. Elemens de musique, théorique et pratique,
suivant les principes de M. Rameau. Paris. Facs. New York: Broude, 1966.
Reprint in 1759. 2nd ed. 1762. Reprints in 1766, 1772, and 1779. Facs. of
1779 print. Les introuvables, France: Editions d’aujourd’hui, 1984. German



=== PAGE 334 ===

324

translation of 1752 ed. in Marpurg 1757. Partial English transl. in Encyclo-
paedia Britannica, 2nd ed., 1784; 3rd ed., 1797.

D’Alembert, Jean le Rond, and Denis Diderot. 1751-1765. Encyclopédie, ou
dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers. Paris.

Allerup, Albert. 1931. Die ‘Musica Practica’ des Johann Andreas Herbst und ibre
entwicklungsgeschichtliche Bedeutung: Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der
deutschen Schulmusik. Kassel: Barenreiter.

Amat, Joan Carlos. 1627. Guitarra espanola. Lérida. Numerous editions into the
eighteenth century.

Anderson, Emily, editor and translator. 1966. The Letters of Mozart and His
Family. 2nd ed. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Antoniotto, Giorgio. 1760. L’Arte Armonica; or, A Treatise on the Composition
of Musick. London.

Arnold, Franck Thomas. 1931. The Art of Accompaniment from a Thoroughbass.
London: Oxford University Press. Facs. New York: Dover, 1965.

Artusi, Giovanni Maria. 1586. L’Arte del contraponto ridotta in tavole. Venice.

. 1589. Seconda parte dell’arte del contraponto. Venice.

——. 1598. L’Arte del contraponto. Venice, 1598.

. 1600. L’Artusi, ovvero Delle imperfettioni della moderna musica. Venice.

Partial English translation in Strunk 1950. References are to this translation.

. 1603. Seconda parte dell’Artusi, overo Delle imperfettioni della moderna
musica. Venice.

Avianius, Johannes. 1581. Isagoge in libros musicae poeticae. Erfurt. Partial re-
print and English translation in Rivera 1978.

Azopardi, Francesco. 1786. Le musicien pratique ou legons .. . dans l’art du
contrepoint ... composé dans les principes des conservatoires d’Italie. French
transl. by Nicolas Framery. Paris.

Bach, Carl Philipp Emanuel. 1753. Versuch tiber die wabre Art das Clavier zu
spielen. [First part.] Berlin. Facs. Leipzig: Breitkopf & Hartel, 1957 and 1969.
Numerous later editions. English translation in Mitchell 1949.

. 1757. “Einfall, einen doppelten Contrapunct in der Octave von sechs

Tacten zu machen, ohne die Regeln davon zu wissen.” In Marpurg 1754—

1778 3 (1757):167-174.

. 1762. Versuch iiber die wahre Art das Clavier zu spielen. [Second Part.]
Berlin. Numerous later editions. Facsimiles and translation listed under Bach
1753. May have circulated in some form before 1760; Sorge [1760] (Chapter
23, par. 29) refers to C. P. E. Bach writing on accompaniment.

Baker, Nancy. 1975. “From Teil to Tonstiick: The Significance of the Versuch . . .
by Heinrich Christoph Koch.” Ph.D. diss., Yale University.

. 1976. “Heinrich Koch and the Theory of Melody.” Journal of Music

Theory 20:1—48.

. 1977. “The Aesthetic Theories of Heinrich Christoph Koch.” Interna-

tional Review of the Aesthetics and Sociology of Music 8:183—209.

. 1983. Introductory Essay on Composition. New Haven: Yale University

Press. Partial translation of Koch 1782-1793.

Bibliography


=== PAGE 335 ===

. 1988. “‘Der Urstoff der Musik’: Implications for Harmony and Melody
in the Theory of Heinrich Koch.” Music Analysis 7:3-30.

Baron, Ernst Gottlieb. 1727. Historisch-Theoretisch und Practische Untersuchung
des Instruments der Lauten. Nirnberg.

. 1756. Abriss einer Abhandlung von der Melodie. Berlin. Partial reprint
in Benary [1961].

Bartolomi, Angelo Michele. 1669. Table pour apprendre facilement a toucher le
theorbe sur la basse continue. Paris.

Batteux, Charles. 1746. Les beaux-arts réduits a un méme principe. Paris. German
translation in Ramler 1758.

Beach, David. 1974a. “The Harmonic Theories of Johann Philipp Kirnberger.”
Ph.D. diss., Yale University.

. 1974b. “The Origins of Harmonic Analysis.” Journal of Music Theory
18:274—-306.

Beach, David, and Jiirgen Thym. 1979. “‘The True Principles for the Practice of
Harmony’ by Johann Philipp Kirnberger.” Journal of Music Theory 23:163-
225. Translation of Kirnberger 1773.

. 1982. The Art of Strict Musical Composition by Johann Philipp Kirnber-
ger. New Haven: Yale University Press. Partial translation of Kirnberger
1771-1779.

Beck, Lewis White. 1969. Early German Philosophy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.

Bellermann, Heinrich. 1872. “Nachtrag zu Kirnberger’s Briefen.” Allgemeine mu-
sikalische Zeitung 7:457-459.

Bemetzrieder, Anton. 1771. Legons de clavecin, et principes d’harmonie. Paris.
Facs. New York: Broude, 1966. Reprints in Denis Diderot’s Oeuvres
completes.

Benary, Peter. [1961]. Die deutsche Kompositionslehre des 18. Jabrhunderts. Leip-
zig: Breitkopf & Hartel.

Berardi, Angel. 1687. Documenti armonici. Bologna. Facs. Bologna: Forni, 1970.

. 1689. Miscellanea musicale. Bologna. Facs. Bologna: Forni, 1970.

Berger, Karol. 1987. Musica ficta. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bernard, Jonathan. 1989. “The Marpurg-Sorge Controversy.” Music Theory Spec-
trum 11:164—-186.

Bernhard, Christoph. [c. 1655]. Tractatus compositionis augmentatus. Ms. pub-
lished in Miiller-Blattau 1926. English translation in Hilse 1973. All references
are to this translation.

Béthizy, Jean Laurent de. 1754. Exposition de la théorie et de la pratique de la
musique. Paris. 2nd ed. 1764. Facs. Geneva: Minkoff, 1972.

Bewerunge, Henry. [1895]. Harmony Simplified. London. Translation of Riemann
1893.

Bianciardi, Francesco. 1607. Breve regola per imparar’ a sonare sopra il basso.
Siena. Facs. Milan, 1965. German translation in Haas 1929. Partial English
translation in Arnold 1931.

Blainville, Charles. 1746. Harmonie theorico-pratique. Paris.

Bibliography

325


=== PAGE 336 ===

326

Blankenburg, Quirinus van. 1739. Elementa musica, of Niew licht tot het welver-
staan van de musiec en de bas-continuo. The Hague. Facs. Amsterdam: Frits
Knuf, 1972.

Blow, John. [c. 1670?]. Rules for Playing of a Through Bass. Ms. published in
Arnold 1931, pp. 163-172.

Bononcini, Giovanni Maria. 1673. Musico prattico. Bologna. Facs. Hildesheim:
Olms, 1969 and New York: Broude, 1969. Later editions Venice, 1678 and
Bologna, 1688. German translation. Stuttgart, 1701.

Bontempi, Andrea. 1660. Nova quatuor vocibus componendi methodus. Dresden.

. 1695. Historia musica. Perugia. Facs. Bologna: Forni, 1971 and Geneva:
Minkoff, 1975.

Bradshaw, Murray, and Edward Soehnlen. 1984. English translation of Diruta
1609. Henryville: Institute of Mediaeval Music.

Brenet, Michel. 1888. “La régle de l’octave et ses inventeurs.” Le Guide Musicale
3.4:235-237, 243-244.

. 1906-1907. “La librarie musicale en France de 1653 4 1790 d’aprés les
Registres de priviléges.” Sammelbande der Internationalen Musik-Gesells-
chaft 8:401-466.

Briscoe, Roger. 1975. “Rameau’s ‘Démonstration du principe de ’harmonie and
Nouvelles réflexions’: An Annotated Translation.” Ph.D. diss., Indiana
University.

Brofsky, Howard. 1980. “Giovanni Battista Martini.” In The New Grove.

Brossard, Sébastien de. 1703. Dictionaire de musique. Paris. Facs. Amsterdam:
Antiqua, 1964.

Buelow, George. 1962. “Heinichen’s Treatment of Dissonance.” Journal of Music
Theory 6:216—274. Reprinted in 1986 edition of Buelow 1966a.

. 1966a. Thorough-bass Accompaniment According to Johann David Hein-

ichen. Los Angeles: University of California Press. 2nd ed. Ann Arbor: UMI

Research Press, 1986.

. 1966b. “The Loci topici and Affect in Late Baroque Music: Heinichen’s

Practical Demonstration.” Music Review 27:161—176.

. 1980a. “Affections, Doctrine of the.” “Figures, Doctrine of the.” “Rhet-

oric and Music.” In The New Grove.

. 1980b. “Schroter, Christoph Gottlob.” In The New Grove.

Burmeister, Joachim. 1599. Hypomnematum musicae poeticae. Rostock.

. 1606. Musica poetica. Rostock. Facs. Kassel: Barenreiter, 1955.

Burrigel, Johann Georg. 1737. Compendiose musicalische Machine. Augsburg.

Busch, Hermann. 1970. Leonhard Eulers Beitrag zur Musiktheorie. Regensburg:
Bosse.

Buttstett, Johann Heinrich. [c. 1715]. Ut mi sol, re fa la, Tota Musica et Harmonia
Aeterna. Erfurt. See Lester 1989, p. 119, concerning the date.

Calvisius, Sethus. 1592. Melopoeia. Erfurt. 2nd ed. Edited by Heinrich Grimm.
Magdeburg, 1630.

Campion, Francois. 1716. Traité d’accompagnement et de composition, selon la
regle des octaves. Paris. Facs. Geneva: Minkoff, 1976.

Bibliography


=== PAGE 337 ===

Campion, Thomas. [c. 1613]. A New Way of Making Fowre Parts in Counter-
point. London. See Lester 1989, p. 33, concerning the date. Reprinted in
Vivian 1909. All references are to that reprint.

Caplin, William. 1981. “Theories of Harmonic-Metric Relationships from Ra-
meau to Riemann.” Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago.

Capri, Antonio. 1945. Giuseppe Tartini. Milan: Garzanti.

Castel, Louis Bertrand. 1722. Review of Rameau 1722. Journal de Trévoux,
pp. 1713-1743, 1876—1910. Partial German translation in Neuer Zeitungen
von Gelebrten Sachen, 1723:818—821, 878-880. Facs. of review and trans-
lation in Rameau CTW 1.

. 1728. Review of Rameau 1726. Journal de Trévoux, pp. 472-481. Fac-

simile in Rameau CTW 2.

. 1737. Review of Rameau 1737. Journal de Trévoux, pp. 2142-2167.
Printed in Rameau CTW 6.

Catel, Charles-Simon. 1802. Traité d’harmonie . . . adopté par le Conservatoire.
Paris.

Chailley, Jacques. 1965. “Rameau et la théorie musicale.” La Revue musicale.
Number 260:65—95.

Chandler, Glenn. 1975. “Rameau’s ‘Nouveau systéme de musique théorique’: An
Annotated Translation with Commentary.” Ph.D. diss., Indiana University.

Choron, Alexandre-Etienne, and Francois Joseph Fayolle. 1810-1811. Diction-
naire historique des musiciens. Paris. Facs. Hildesheim: Olms, 1970.

Christensen, Thomas. 1985. “Science and Music Theory in the Enlightenment;
D’Alembert’s Critique of Rameau.” Ph.D. diss., Yale University.

. 1987a. “Rameau’s ‘L’Art de la Basse Fondamentale.’” Music Theory

Spectrum 9:18—41. Addendum in Christensen 1990<.

. 1987b. “Eighteenth-Century Science and the Corps sonore: The Scientific

Background to Rameau’s Principle of Harmony.” Journal of Music Theory

31:23-50.

. 1989. “Music Theory as Scientific Propaganda: The Case of D’Alembert’s

Elémens de musique.” Journal of the History of Ideas 50:409-427.

. 1990a. “Communication.” Music Theory Spectrum 12:276-277.

. 1990b. “Nichelmann contra C. Ph. E. Bach: Harmonic Theory and Mu-

sical Politics at the Court of Frederick the Great.” In Carl Philipp Emanuel

Bach und die europdische Musikkultur des mittleren 18. Jahrhunderts,

pp. 189-220. Edited by Hans Joachim Marx. Gottingen.

. 1992a. “The Spanish Baroque Guitar and Seventeenth-Century Triadic

Theory.” Journal of Music Theory.

. 1992b. “The Rule of the Octave in Thorough-Bass Theory and Practice.”

Acta Musicologica.

. 1993. Jean-Philippe Rameau: The Science of Music Theory in the Enlight-
enment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Clement. 1758. Essai sur l’accompagnement. Paris.

Cohen, Albert. 1971. “La Supposition and the Changing Concept of Dissonance
in Baroque Theory.” Journal of the American Musicological Society 24:63—-84.

Bibliography

327


=== PAGE 338 ===

328

. 1980. “Rameau.” In The New Grove.

. 1981. Music in the French Royal Academy of Sciences: A Study in the
Evolution of Musical Thought. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Cohen, Vered. 1983. On the Modes. New Haven: Yale University Press. Trans-
lation of Book 4 of Zarlino 1558.

Corrette, Michel. 1753. Le maitre de clavecin pour l’accompagnement . . . le tout
selon la régle de l’octave et de la basse fondamentale. Paris. Partial facs.
Geneva: Minkoff, 1976.

Couperin, Frangois. [undated]. Regle pour l’accompagnement. Ms. published in
Oeuvres complétes de Francois Couperin, Oeuvres didactiques. Paris, 1933,
pp. 13-17. A published version (before 1722) is lost but was listed in Ballard’s
catalog of his publications at the back of Rameau 1722 and 1726 (see also
pp. 7-8 of the Oeuvres).

. 1716. L’Art de toucher le clavecin. Paris.

Cyr, Mary. 1980b. “Rameau.” In The New Grove, work list.

Dadelsen, Georg von. 1958. “Johann Philipp Kirnberger.” In MGG.

Dahlhaus, Carl. 1957. “War Zarlino Dualist?” Musikforschung 10:286—290.

. 1978. “Der rhetorische Formbegriff H. Chr. Kochs und die Theorie der

Sonatenform.” Archiv fiir Musikwissenschaft 35:15 5-177.

. 1984. Die Musiktheorie im 18. und 19. Jahrhundert: 1, Grundziige einer

Systematik. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.

. 1985. Realism in Nineteenth-Century Music. Translated by Mary Whit-

tall. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

. 1986a. “The Eighteenth Century as a Music-Historical Epoch.” Trans-

lated by Ernest Harriss. College Music Symposium 26:1—6.

. 1986b. “Ist Rameaus Traité de l’harmonie eine Harmonielehre?” Mu-

siktheorie 1:123-127.

. 1989. Die Musiktheorie im 18. und 19. Jahrhundert: 2, Deutschland.
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.

Damschroder, David, and David Russell Williams. 1990. Music Theory from
Zarlino to Schenker: A Bibliography and Guide. Stuyvesant, N.Y.:
Pendragon.

Dandrieu, Jean-Frangois. [c. 1719]. Principes de l’acompagnement du clavecin.
Paris. Later editions through the 1760s.

Daube, Johann Friedrich. 1756. General-Bass in drey Accorden. Leipzig. The
preface is dated 1754. English translation in Wallace 1983.

. 1757. Letter to Marpurg, dated November 30, 1756, printed in Marpurg

1754-1778, 3 (175§7):69-70.

. 1770-1771. Der musikalische Dilettant; eine Abhandlung des General-

basses. Vienna. English translation in Snook 1978.

. 1773. Der musikalische Dilettant; eine Abhandlung der Komposition.

Vienna. English translation in Snook 1978.

. 1797-1798. Anleitung zur Erfindung der Melodie und ihrer Fortsetzung.

Vienna and Linz. Some printings under the title Anleitung zur Selbstunterricht

in der musikalischen Komposition, sowohl fiir die Instrumental- als Vocal-

Bibliography


=== PAGE 339 ===

musik. May have been completed by 1773 (Snook 1978, pp. 458, 469).

David, Hans T., and Arthur Mendel. 1966. The Bach Reader. Revised ed. New
York: W. W. Norton.

Delair, Denis. 1690. Traité d’acompagnement pour le theorbe et le clavessin . . .
aussi a acompagner les basses qui ne sont pas chifréez. Paris. Facs. Geneva:
Minkoff, 1972. 2nd ed. Paris, 1723 (according to title page) or 1724 (ac-
cording to final page). Rameau 1732 and Rousseau 1768 cite a 1700 edition,
but no copy survives.

de Laisement, Balliére. 1764. Théorie de la musique. Paris.

Denis, Pietro. 1773. Traité de composition musicale. Paris. Reprinted 1780, 1788.
Translation of Fux 1725.

De Podio, Guillermus. 1495. Ars musicorum. Valencia. Facs. Bologna: Forni,
1975. Partial English translation in Seay 1978.

Deppert, Heinrich. 1987. “Anmerkungen zu Alfred Diirr.” Musiktheorie 2:107—
108.

Descartes, René. 1618. Compendium musicae. Ms. published Utrecht, 1650. Facs.
Strasbourg: Heitz, [1965] and New York: Broude, 1968. English translation
in Robert 1961. All references are to this English translation.

Deshayes, Thérése. 1737. Review of Rameau 1737. Le pour et contre 13, no.
179:34—48. Facs. in Rameau CTW 6.

Deutsch, Otto Erich. 1952. “Ink-Pot and Squirt-Gun.” Musical Times 93:401—-
403.

Diderot, Denis. [c. 1761]. Rameau’s Nephew. English translation by Leonard
Tancock. London: Penguin, 1966.

Diruta, Girolamo. 1609. II transilvano, seconda parte. Venice. Later edition in
1622. Facs. of the 1622 ed. Bologna: Forni, 1969. English translation in
Bradshaw and Soehnlen 1984.

Duchez, Marie-Elisabeth. 1986. “Valeur épistémologique de la théorie de la basse
fondamentale de Jean-Philippe Rameau: connaissance scientifique et repré-
sentation de la musique.” Studies on Voltaire and the 18th Century 245:91-
130.

Duckles, Vincent. 1970. “Johann Adam Hiller’s ‘Critical Prospectus for a Music
Library.’” In Studies in Eighteenth-Century Music, pp. 177-185. Ed. R. E.
Chapman and H. C. Robbins Landon. New York: Oxford University Press.

. 1980. “Johann Nicolaus Forkel.” In The New Grove.

Dinkelfeind, Caspar (pseud.). 1755. Gedanken eines Liebhabers der Tonkunst
iiber Herrn Nichelmanns Tractat von der Melodie. Berlin.

Dirr, Alfred. 1986. “Ein Dokument aus dem Unterricht Bachs?” Musiktheorie
I:163—170.

Earhart, A. Louise Hall. 1985. “The Music Theories of Jean-Laurent de Béthizy
and Their Relationship to Those of Rameau and D’Alembert.” Ph.D. diss.,
Ohio State University.

Ebner, Wolfgang. 1653. Eine Instruction und Unterweisung zum Generalbass. In
Herbst 1653.

Estéve Pierre. 1751. Nouvelle découverte du principe de ’harmonie avec un exa-

Bibliography

329


=== PAGE 340 ===

330

men de ce que Ms. Rameau a publie sous le titre de demonstration de ce
principe. Paris. Reprinted in 1752.

Euler, Leonhard. 1739. Tentamen novae theoriae musicae. St. Petersburg. Facs.
New York: Broude, 1968. English translation in Smith 1960.

Faber, Heinrich. 1548. Compendiolum musicae pro incipientibus. Braunschweig.

Federhofer, Hellmut. 1957. “Der Gradus ad Parnassum von Johann Joseph Fux
und seine Vorlaufer in Oesterreich.” Musikerziebung 11:31-35.

. 1958. “Zur handschriftlichen Ueberlieferung der Musiktheorie in Oester-

reich in der 2weiten Halfte des 17. Jahrhunderts.” Musikforschung 11:264—

269.

. 1962. “Johann Joseph Fux als Musiktheoretiker.” In Hans Albrecht in

Memoriam, pp. 109-115. Kassel: Barenreiter.

. 1964. “Marco Scacchis ‘Cribrum musicum’ 1643 und die Kompositions-

lehre von Christoph Bernhard.” In Festschrift Hans Engel, pp. 76-90. Edited

by Horst Heussner. Kassel: Barenreiter.

. 1970. “Johann Joseph Fux und Johann Mattheson im Urteil Lorenz

Christoph Mizlers.” In Speculum musicae artis, Festgabe fiir Heinrich Hus-

man, pp. 111-124. Edited by Heinz Becker and Reinhard Gerlach. Munich:

Fink.

. 1971-1972. “Mozart als Schiiler und Lehrer in der Musiktheorie.” Mozart

Jahrbuch, pp. 89-106.

. 1978-1979. “Mozart und die Musiktheorie seiner Zeit.” Mozart Jahr-

buch, pp. 172-175.

. 1982. “Fux’s Gradus ad Parnassum as Viewed by Heinrich Schenker.”
Music Theory Spectrum 4:66-75.

Feil, Arnold. 1955. Satztechnische Fragen in den Kompositionslebren von F. E.
Niedt, J. Riepel und H. Chr. Koch. Heidelberg: Gehrer & Grosch.

. 1957. “Zum Gradus ad parnassum von J. J. Fux.” Archiv fiir Musikwis-
senschaft 14:184-192.

Fellerer, Karl Gustav. 1962. “Zur Melodielehre in 18. Jahrhundert.” Studia mu-
sicologica 3: 109-115.

Ferris, Joan. 1959. “The Evolution of Rameau’s Harmonic Theories.” Journal of
Music Theory 3:231-256.

Fétis, Francois-Joseph. 1833-1844. Biographie universelle des musiciens. Brussels.
Later editions. Paris, 1860-1865 and 1870-1875.

Fleury, Nicolas. 1660. Methode pour apprendre facilement 4 toucher le theorbe
sur la basse continue. Paris. Facs. Geneva: Minkoff, 1972.

Fontenelle, Bernard. 1707. “Sur un nouveau systéme de musique.” In Histoire de
V Académie royale des sciences 1701, pp. 155-175. Amsterdam.

Forbes, Elliott. 1967. Thayer’s Life of Beethoven. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.

Forkel, Johann Nicolaus. 1777. Ueber die Theorie der Musik, insofern sie Lieb-
habern und Kennern nothwendig und niitzlich ist. Géttingen.

Forster, Emanuel Aloys. 1805. Anleitung zum General Bass. Vienna.

Frére, Alexandre. 1706. Transpositions de musique. Paris.

Fuller, David. 1980. “Jean-Francois Dandrieu.” In The New Grove.

Bibliography


=== PAGE 341 ===

Fux, Johann Joseph. 1725. Gradus ad parnassum. Vienna. Facs. Fux Sdmtliche
Werke, vii/t with preface and critical notes by Alfred Mann. Kassel: Baren-
reiter, 1967. Facs. New York: Broude, 1974. German translation in Mizler
1742. Italian translation in Manfredi 1761. English translation in [Heck?
1767?]. French edition in Denis 1773. German translation of portion on
species counterpoint in Mann 1938. English translation of portion on species
counterpoint in Mann 1943 and 1965a. English translation of portion on
fugue and invertible counterpoint in Mann 1965b. English translation of
miscellaneous later portions in Lester 1989. All page references are to Mann’s
or Lester’s English translations, except for untranslated passages.

Gafori, Franchino. 1496. Practica musicae. Milan. Facs. Farnborough: 1967.
English translations in Miller 1968 and Young 1969. All references are to
Miller 1968.

Galilei, Vincenzo. 1581. Dialogo della musica antica et della moderna. Florence.
Facs. New York: Broude, 1967.

. 1588. Discorso intorno all’uso delle dissonanze. Ms. Published in Rempp
1980.

Gasparini, Francesco. 1708. L’armonico pratico al cimbalo. Venice. Facs. New
York: Broude, [1967]. Several editions through 1802. English translation in
Stillings 1963.

Geminiani, Francesco. [c. 1754]. Guida armonica, o dizionario armonico. London.

. [after 1754]. A Supplement to the Guida Armonica, with Examples.
London.

Gerber, Ernst Ludwig. 1790. Historisch-Biographisches Lexikon der Tonkiinstler.
Leipzig. Facs. Graz: Akademische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt, 1977.

Gerigk, Herbert. 1934. “Wiirfelmusik.” Zeitschrift fiir Musikwissenschaft
16:359-363.

Gessele, Cynthia. 1989. “The Institutionalization of Music Theory in France:
1764-1802.” Ph.D. diss., Princeton University.

Gianotti [Pietro]. 1759. Le Guide du Compositeur. Paris. Closely based on Ra-
meau [c. 1740] (Christensen 1990a). RISM and Eitner do not list a 1755
edition cited in MGG and The New Grove.

Girdlestone, Cuthbert. 1969. Jean-Philippe Rameau: His Life and Work. 2nd ed.
New York: Dover.

Goldschmidt, Hugo. 1915. Die Musikdsthetik des 18. Jahrhunderts und ihre
Beziehungen zu seinem Kunstschaffen. Ziirich and Leipzig. Facs. Hildesheim:
Olms, 1968.

Gossett, Philip. 1971. Treatise on Harmony. Translation of Rameau 1722.

Gotwals, Vernon. 1963. Joseph Haydn, Eighteenth-Century Gentleman and Ge-
nius. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. Translation of Griesinger 1810.

Grant, Cecil Powell. 1976. “Kirnberger versus Rameau: Toward a New Approach
to Comparative Theory.” Ph.D. diss., University of Cincinnati.

. 1977. “The Real Relationship between Kirnberger’s and Rameau’s Con-
cept of Fundamental Bass.” Journal of Music Theory 21:324—338.

Grave, Floyd, and Margaret Grave. 1987. In Praise of Harmony; The Teachings
of Abbé Georg Joseph Vogler. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

Bibliography

331


=== PAGE 342 ===

332

Grenerin, Henri. [c. 1670]. Livre de theorbe . . . avec une nouvelle methode tres
facile pour apprendre a jotier les basses continues. Paris.

Gribenski, Jean. 1980. “A propos des ‘Legons de clavecin’ (1771): Diderot et
Bemetzrieder.” Revue de musicologie 66:125—178.

Griesinger, Georg August. 1810. Biographische Notizen iiber Joseph Haydn. Leip-
zig. English translation in Gotwals 1963.

Grout, Donald. 1965. A Short History of Opera. 2nd ed. New York: Columbia
University Press.

Gunn, Barnabas. 1752. Twelve English Songs . . . Set to Musick by the New-
Invented method of Composing with the Spruzzarino. London.

Haas, Robert. 1929. “Das Generalbassflugblatt Francesco Bianciardis.” In Musik-
wissenschaftliche Beitrage: Festschrift fir Johannes Wolf, pp. 48-56. Edited
by Walter Lott, Helmuth Osthoff, and Werner Wolffheim. Berlin: Breslauer.

Haggh, Raymond. 1962. Hugo Riemann’s ‘Geschichte der Musiktheorie’ . . .
Books I and II. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. Partial translation of
Riemann 1898.

. 1982. School of Clavier Playing. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
English translation of Tirk 1789.

Hahn, Georg Joachim Joseph. 1751. Der wohl unterweisene General-Bass-Schiiler.
Augspurg. 2nd ed. 1768.

Hahn, Kurt. 1957. “Johann Kuhnaus ‘Fundamenta compositionis’.” In Bericht
Hamburg 1956:103-105.

Handel, George Frideric. [undated]. Ms. treatise for Princess Anne. Published in
Mann 1987, pp. 21-32.

Harnish, Otto. 1608. Artis musicae. Frankfurt.

Harris-Warrick, Rebecca. 1984. ‘Principles of the Harpsichord’ by Monsieur de
Saint Lambert. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Translation of Saint
Lambert 1702.

Harriss, Ernest. Johann Mattheson’s ‘Der vollkommene Capellmeister’: A Trans-
lation and Commentary. Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press, 1981. Translation
of Mattheson 1739.

Hayes, Deborah. 1974a. Dissertation on the Different Methods of Accompani-
ment. Ann Arbor: University Microfilms. Translation of Rameau 1732.

. 1974b. Harmonic Generation. Ann Arbor: University Microfilms. Trans-

lation of Rameau 1737.

. 1974¢. “Rameau’s ‘Nouvelle méthode.’” Journal of the American Musti-
cological Society 27:61—-74.

Hayes, Elizabeth. 1977. “F. W. Marpurg’s ‘Anleitung zum Clavierspielen’ . . .
Translation and Commentary.” Ph.D. diss., Stanford University.

Hayes, William. 1751. The Art of Composing Music by a Method entirely New,
suited to the meanest capacity. London.

Heck, John Jasper. [c. 1760?]. Short and Fundamental Instructions for Learning
Thorough Bass. London.

? [17672]. Practical Rules for Learning Counterpoint. Translation of Fux

1725. Later prints through c. 1787.

Bibliography


=== PAGE 343 ===

? [c. 1776]. A Complete Treatise of Thorough Bass. London. Partial trans-
lation of Mattheson 1735.

Heinichen, Johann David. 1711. Neu erfundene und griindliche Anweisung .. .
des General-Basses. Hamburg. Author’s name is spelled Heinchen on title
page.

. 1728. Der General-Bass in der Composition. Dresden. Facs. Hildesheim:
Olms, 1969.

Helm, Ernest Eugene. 1960. Music at the Court of Frederick the Great. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press.

. 1966. “Six Random Measures of C. P. E. Bach.” Journal of Music Theory
10:139-151.

Herbst, Johann Andreas. 1642. Musica practica sive instructio pro symphoniacis
.. . auff jetzige Italienische Manier. Nuremberg.

. 1653. Arte pratica et poética. Frankfurt.

Hesse, Johann Heinrich. [1776]. Kurze, doch hinlangliche Anweisung zum Gen-
eral-Bass. Hamburg. Date is at end of Vorrede.

Hiller, Johann Adam. 1766-1770. Wéchentliche Nachrichten und Anmerkungen.
Leipzig.

Hilse, Walter. 1973. “The Treatises of Christoph Bernhard.” Music Forum 3: 1-—
196. Translation of Bernhard [c. 1655].

Holden, John. 1770. Essay Towards a Rational System of Music. Glasgow and
London.

Holder, William. 1731. A Treatise of the Natural Grounds, and Principles of
Harmony. London. Includes Keller 1707.

Horsley, Imogene. 1966. Fugue: History and Practice. New York: Free Press.

Jacobi, Erwin. 1958. “Jean-Adam Serre, ein vergessener Schweizer Musiktheore-
tiker.” Schweizerische Musikzeitung 98:145-148.

. 1964. “Rameau and Padre Martini.” Musical Quarterly 50:452-475.

Jamard, Canon. 1769. Recherches sur la théorie de la musique. Paris.

Janowka, Thomas Balthasar. 1701. Clavis ad thesaurum magnae artis musicae.
Prague. Partial English translation in Lester 1989.

Jeppesen, Knud. 1939. Counterpoint: The Polyphonic Vocal Style of the Sixteenth
Century. Translated by Glen Haydon. New York: Prentice-Hall, 1939. Danish
edition, 1931.

.. 1970. The Style of Palestrina and the Dissonance. Translated by Margaret
Hamerik. 3rd ed. New York: Dover, 1970. Danish edition, 1923.

Johnson, Fredric. 1985. “Tartini’s Trattato ... An Annotated Translation with
Commentary.” Ph.D. diss., Indiana University. Translation of Tartini 1754.

Kalib, Sylvan. 1973. “Thirteen Essays from the Three Yearbooks Das Meisterwerk
in der Musik by Heinrich Schenker.” Ph.D. diss., Northwestern University.

Kassler, Jamie Croy, and Michael Kassler. 1980. “John Jasper Heck.” In The New
Grove.

Keane, Sister Mary. 1961. The Theoretical Writings of Jean-Philippe Rameau.
Washington: Catholic University of America Press.

Keiler, Allan. 1981. “Music as Metalanguage: Rameau’s Fundamental Bass.” In

Bibliography

333


=== PAGE 344 ===

Music Theory: Special Topics, pp. 83-100. Edited by Richmond Browne.
New York: Academic Press.

Keller, Gottfried. 1707. Rules for Playing a Thorough Bass. London. Earlier
edition in 1705. Later editions as A Compleat Method . . .. 1717—c. 1731.
Reprinted in Holder 1731. All editions contain numerous errors.

Kellner, David. 1732. Treulicher Unterricht im General-Bass. Hamburg. Editions
through 1796. Facs. of 1737 edition. Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1979. Facs.
of 1743 edition. Laaber: Laaber-Verlag, 1980. Swedish, Dutch, and Russian
translations, 1739-1791.

Kirnberger, Johann Philipp. 1757. Der allezeit fertige Polonoisen- und Menuetten-
componist. Berlin. French translation. Berlin, 1757.

. 1759. Allegro fiir das Clavier allein. Berlin.

. 1771-1779. Die Kunst des reinen Satzes. Vol. 1. Berlin, 1771; Berlin and

Kénigsberg, 1774. Revised edition, Berlin, c. 1776. Vol. 2. Berlin and K6n-

igsberg, 1776-1779. Facs., supposedly of the Berlin and K6nigsberg 1776

and 1776-1779 editions, Hildesheim: Olms, 1968 (see Beach-Thym 1982,

Pp. xviii, concerning the probable source of volume 1 of this facsimile). English

translation in Beach and Thym 1982.

. 1773. Die wahren Grundsdtze zum Gebrauch der Harmonie. Berlin and

K6nigsberg. Possibly written by Johann Abraham Peter Schulz (see p. 240).

Facs. Hildesheim: Olms, 1970. English translation in Beach and Thym 1979.

2nd ed. Vienna, 1793.

. [c. 1781]. Grundsatze des Generalbasses als erste Linien zur Composition.

Berlin.

. 1782. Gedanken tiber die verschiedenen Lehrarten in der Komposition,

als Vorbereitung zur Fugenkenntniss. Berlin. Facs. Hildesheim: Olms, 1974.

2nd ed. Vienna, 1793. English translation in Nelson and Boomgaarden 1986.

. 1783. Methode, Sonaten aus’m Ermel zu schiiddeln. Berlin. English trans-
lation in Newman 1961.

Knouse, Nola Reed. 1986. Review of Baker 1983. Music Theory Spectrum 8:143—
148.

Koch, Heinrich Christoph. 1782-1793. Versuch einer Anleitung zur Composition.
Rudolstadt and Leipzig. 3 vols. Facs. Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1969. Partial
English translation in Baker 1983. Complete table of contents in Baker 1983,
PP. 249-252.

. 1795. Journal der Tonkunst. Erfurt.

. 1802. Musikalisches Lexikon. Frankfurt. Editions through 1865. Facs.
Hildesheim: Olms, 1964.

Kohlschiitter, Bernd. 1978. “Die musikalische Ausbilding auf Salzburger Boden
im 18. Jahrhundert.” Mozart Jabrbuch, pp. 200-202.

Kramer, Richard. 1975. “Notes to Beethoven’s Education.” Journal of the Amer-
ican Musicological Society 28:72-101.

Krehbiel, James. 1964. “Harmonic Principles of Jean-Philippe Rameau and His
Contemporaries.” Ph.D. diss., Indiana University.

Lach, Robert. 1918. W. A. Mozart als Theoretiker. Vienna. Includes facsimile and
transcription of Mozart 1784.

Bibliography


=== PAGE 345 ===

Ladewig, James. 1980. “Geminiani.” In The New Grove, work list.

Laisement, Balliére de. 1764. Théorie de la musique. Paris.

Lampe, John Frederick. 1737. A Plain and Compendious Method of Teaching
Thorough Bass, After the most Rational Manner. London. Facs. New York:
Broude, 1969.

. 1740. The Art of Musick. London.

Lanfranco, Giovanni Maria. 1533. Scintille di Musica. Brescia. Facs. Bologna:
Forni, 1970. English translation in Lee 1961.

Langner, Thomas. 1980. Article “Christoph Nichelmann.” In The New Grove.

Larsen, Arved. 1980. “Berardi.” In The New Grove.

Lee, Barbara. 1961. “Giovanni Maria Lanfranco’s Scintille di musica and Its
Relation to 16th-Century Music Theory.” Ph.D. diss., Cornell University.
Translation of Lanfranco 1533.

Lester, Joel. 1973. Review of Busch 1970. Notes 29:450—451.

. 1974. “Root-Position and Inverted Triads in Theory around 1600.”

Journal of the American Musicological Society 27:110-119.

. 1977. “The Fux-Mattheson Correspondence: An Annotated Translation.”

Current Musicology 24:37-62.

. 1981. “Simultaneity Structures and Harmonic Functions in Tonal Music.”

In Theory Only 5/5:3-28.

. 1989. Between Modes and Keys: German Theory 1592-1802. Stuyvesant,

N.Y.: Pendragon.

. 1990. “A 17th-Century Publication Including Christoph Bernhard’s Fi-

gurenlebre.” Israel Studies in Musicology 5:97—-111.

. 1994. “Mozart as Composition Teacher and Late Eighteenth Century
Theory.” In Proceedings of the Hofstra Mozart Bicentennial Conference,
1991. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press.

Levens, Charles. 1743. Abregé des regles de I’harmonie, pour apprendre la com-
position. Bourdeaux.

Lewin, David. 1978. “Two Interesting Passages in Rameau’s Traité de I’har-
monie.” In Theory Only 4:3-11.

. 1981. “Comment.” In Theory Only 5/8:12-14.

Lippius, Johannes. 1610. Disputatio musica tertia. Wittenberg.

. 1612. Synopsis musicae novae. Strassburg. English translation in Rivera
1977.

Locke, Matthew. 1673. Melothesia. London. Facs. New York: Broude, 1975.

Léfgrén, Antonius. 1728. De basso fundamentali. Uppsala.

Lohlein, Georg Simon. 1765. Clavier-Schule oder kurze und griindliche Anweisung
zur Melodie und Harmonie. Leipzig and Zillichau. Editions through 1848.
Russian translation. Moscow, 1773-1774. English translation in Wilson 1979.

. 1781. Clavier-Schule, zweyter Band, worinnen eine vollstandige Anwei-
sung zur Begleitung der unbezifferten Basse. Leipzig and Ziillichau. Editions
through 1848. English translation in Wilson 1979.

Lusitano, Vicente. 1553. Introduttione facilissima, et novissima, di canto fermo,
figurato, contraponto semplice, et in concerto. Rome. Later editions, Venice,
1558, 1561. All references are to the 1561 edition.

Bibliography 335


=== PAGE 346 ===

336

Madin, Henri. 1742. Traité, du contrepoint simple, ou du chant sur le livre.
Paris.

Malcolm, Alexander. 1721. A Treatise of Musick. Edinburgh. Facs. New York:
Da Capo, 1970.

Manfredi, Alessandro. 1761. Salita al Parnasso. Carpi. Italian translation of Fux
1725.

Manfredini, Vincenzo. 1775. Regole armoniche. Venice. Facs. New York: Broude,
1966.

Mann, Alfred. 1938. Die Lehre vom Kontrapunkt. Celle: Hermann Moeck. Re-
printed 1951. Translation of species counterpoint portion of Fux 1725.

. 1943. Steps to Parnassus. New York: W. W. Norton. Translation of

species counterpoint portion of Fux 1725.

. 1965a. The Study of Counterpoint. New York: W. W. Norton. 2nd ed.

of Mann 1943 with new preface and same pagination.

. 1965b. The Study of Fugue. New York: W. W. Norton. Includes partial

translations of Albrechtsberger 1790, Fux 1725, Marpurg 1753-1754, Mar-

tini [1774-1775].

. 1967. Preface to Fux Sadmtliche Werke, vii/t. Kassel: Barenreiter.

. 1973. “Haydn’s Elementarbuch.” The Music Forum 3:197—-237.

. 1978-1979. “Zur Kontrapunktlehre Haydns und Mozarts.” Mozart Jabr-

buch, pp. 195-199.

. 1987. Theory and Practice. New York: W. W. Norton, 1987.

Marco, Guy, and Claude Palisca. 1968. The Art of Counterpoint. New Haven:
Yale University Press. Translation of Book 3 of Zarlino 1558.

Marpurg, Friedrich Wilhelm. 1749-1750. Critische Musicus an der Spree. Berlin.
Facs. Hildesheim: Olms, 1970.

. 1750-1762. Die Kunst das Clavier zu spielen. Berlin. Two vols.: Vol. 1

reprinted Berlin, 1751, 1760, 1761 and Augsburg, 1761; Vol. 2 in 1762.

French translations. Facs. of the 1762 edition and the 1761 second part on

accompaniment. Hildesheim: Olms, 1969.

. 1753-1754. Abhandlung von der Fuge. Berlin. Facs. Hildesheim: Olms,

1970. Editions and translations through 1858. Partial English translation in

Mann 196sb. (Mann’s fine translation is considerably abridged in text and a

number of musical examples).

. 1754-1778. Historisch-kritische Beytraége zur Aufnahme der Musik. Ber-

lin. Published continuously through 1762, and then again in 1778. Facs.

Hildesheim: Olms, 1970.

. 1755. Anleitung zum Clavierspielen. Berlin. English translation in Hayes

1977. Reprinted 1765. Facs. New York: Broude, 1969; Hildesheim: Olms,

1970. French translation. Berlin, 1756. Facs. Bologna: Forni, 1971; Geneva:

Minkoff, 1973. Dutch translation. Amsterdam, 1760. All references are to

the 1765 print.

. 1755-1762. Handbuch bey dem Generalbasse und der Composition. 3

vols and appendix. Berlin, 1755, 1757, 1758, 1760. Facs. Hildesheim: Olms,

1974. 2nd ed. of Vol. 1. Berlin, 1762. All references to Vol. 1 are to the

Bibliography


=== PAGE 347 ===

second edition. Swedish translation. Stockholm, 1782. Annotated English

edition in Sheldon 1989.

. 17574. Systematische Einleitung in die musicalische Setzkunst, nach den

Lehrsatzen des Herrn Rameau. Leipzig. Translation of D’Alembert 1752.

Facs. Leipzig: Zentralantiquariat der DDR, 1980.

. 1757b. Anfangsgriinde der Theoretischen Music. Berlin. Facs. New York:

Broude, 1966.

. 1758. Anleitung zum Singcomposition. Berlin.

. 1759-1763. Kritische Briefe tiber die Tonkunst. Berlin. Issued weekly,

then collected in three volumes in Berlin, 1760-1764. Facs. Hildesheim:

Olms, 1974.

. 1760. Herrn Georg Andreas Sorgens Anleitung zum Generalbass und zur

Composition. Berlin. Extensive quotations from Sorge [1760] with

commentary.

. 1763. Anleitung zur Musik iiberbaupt. Berlin. Facs. Leipzig: Zentralan-

tiquariat der DDR, 1975.

. 1776. Versuch iiber die musikalische Temperatur, nebst einem Anhang

iiber den Rameau- und Kirnbergerischen Grundbass. Breslau.

. 1786. Legende einer Musikheiligen. Berlin.

Martin, James. 1981. “The Compendium harmonicum (1760) of Georg Andreas
Sorge (1703-1778): A Translation and Critical Commentary.” Ph.D. diss.,
Catholic University. Translation of Sorge [1760].

Martini, Giovanni Battista (Padre). [1756]. Regola ogli organisti per accompag-
nare il Canto fermo. Bologna. Reprinted Bologna: Forni, 1969.

. 1757-1781. Storia della musica. Bologna. Facs. Graz: Akademische

Druck- und Verlagsanstalt, 1967.

. [1774-1775]. Esemplare o sia saggio fondamentale pratico di contrap-
punto sopra il canto fermo. 2 vols. Bologna, [1774 and 1775] (dates on p. viii
in Vol. 1 and at end of dedication in Vol. 2). Facs. Ridgewood: Gregg Press,
1965. Partial English translation in Mann 1965b.

Mason, Kevin. 1981. “Frangois Campion’s Secret Art of Accompaniment for the
Theorbo, Guitar, and Lute.” Journal of the Lute Society of America 14:69—-
94.

Masson, Charles. 1699. Nouveau traité des regles pour la composition de la
musique. 2nd ed. Paris. The first edition is lost. Facs. with introduction by
Imogene Horsley. New York: Da Capo, 1967. (See Schneider 1973, p. 246,
concerning this introduction.) Editions in Paris and Amsterdam through 1755.
Facs. of the 1705 edition. Geneva: Minkoff, 1971.

Mattheson, Johann. 1713. Das neu-erdffnete Orchestre. Hamburg.

. 1717. Das beschiitzte Orchestre. Hamburg.

. 1719. Exemplarische Organisten-Probe im Artikel vom General-Bass.

Hamburg. An earlier version of Mattheson 1731.

. 1721. Das forschende Orchestre. Hamburg. Facs. Hildesheim: Olms,

1976.

. 1722. Critica Musica. Hamburg. Facs. Amsterdam: Frits Knuf, 1964.

Bibliography

337


=== PAGE 348 ===

338

. 1725. Criticae Musicae. Hamburg. Facs. Amsterdam: Frits Knuf, 1964.

. 1731. Grosse General-Bass-Schule. Hamburg. Facs. Hildesheim: Olms,

1968.

. 1735. Kleine General-Bass Schule. Hamburg. Facs. Laaber: Laaber-Ver-

lag, 1980. Partial English translation in Heck [c. 1776].

. 1737. Kern melodischer Wissenschaft. Hamburg. Facs. Hildesheim: Olms,

1976.

. 1739. Der vollkommene Capellmeister. Hamburg. Facs. Kassel: Barenrei-
ter, 1954. English translation in Harriss 1981.

McArtor, Marion. 1951. “Francesco Geminiani, Composer and Theorist.” Ph.D.
diss., University of Michigan.

Mekeel, Joyce. 1960. “The Harmonic Theories of Kirnberger and Marpurg.”
Journal of Music Theory 4:169-193

Mickelsen, William. 1977. Hugo Riemann’s Theory of Harmony, with a Trans-
lation of Riemann’s “History of Theory,” Book 3. Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press. Partial translation of Riemann 1898.

Miller, Clement. A. 1968. English translation of Gafori 1496. [Rome]: American
Institute of Musicology, 1968.

Mitchell, William. 1949. Essay on the True Art of Playing Keyboard Instruments.
New York: W. W. Norton, 1949. Translation of C. P. E. Bach 1753 and
1762. Mitchell combines the 41 chapters of Vol. 2 into 7 chapters and adds
some of the added passages in the 1797 edition.

Mizler, Lorenz. 1736-1754. Musikalischen Bibliothek. Leipzig. Facs. Hilversum:
Frits Knuf, 1966.

. 1739. Anfangsgriinde des Generalbasses. Leipzig, 1739.

. 1742. Gradus ad parnassum. Leipzig. Facs. Hildesheim, 1984. German
translation of Fux 1725.

Montéclair, Michel Pignolet de. 1709. Nouvelle methode pour apprendre la mu-
sique, dédiée a Monsieur Couperin. Paris.

. 1736. Principes de musique. Paris.

Monteverdi, Claudio. 1605. “Studiosi lettori.” Preface to Il quinto libro de’ mad-
rigali. Venice. Facs. Claudio Monteverdi: Tutte le opera, 5. Edited by
G. Francesco Malipiero. English translation in Strunk 1950.

Monteverdi, Giulio Cesare. 1607. “Dichiaratione.” In Claudio Monteverdi,
Scherzi musicali. Venice. English translation in Strunk 1950.

Mozart, Wolfgang. 1784. Barbara Ployers Theorie- und Kompositionsstudien bei
Mozart. Facs. and transcriptions in Lach 1918 and W. A. Mozart Neue
Ausgabe X,30,2 (1989).

. 1785-1786. Thomas Attwoods Theorie- und Kompositionsstudien bei
Mozart. In W. A. Mozart Neue Ausgabe X,30,1 (1965).

Muffat, Georg. 1699. Regulae concentuum partiturae. Ms. published in An Essay
on Thoroughbass. Edited by Helmut Federhofer. N.p.: American Institute of
Musicology, 1961.

Miller-Blattau, Joseph Maria. 1926. Die Kompositionslebre Heinrich Schiitzens
in der Fassung seines Schiilers Christoph Bernhard. Leipzig: Breitkopf &
Hartel, 1926.

Bibliography


=== PAGE 349 ===

Murschhauser, Franz Xaver Anton. 1721. Academia musico-poetica. Nuremberg.

Nelson, Richard, and Donald Boomgaarden. 1986. “Kirnberger’s ‘Thoughts on
the Different Methods of Teaching Composition as Preparation for Under-
standing Fugue.’” Journal of Music Theory 30:71-94. Translation of Kirn-
berger 1782.

Newman, William. 1961. “Kirnberger’s Method for Tossing Off Sonatas.” Mus-
ical Quarterly 47:517—525. Contains English translation of Kirnberger 1783.

Nichelmann, Christoph. 1755. Die Melodie nach ihrem Wesen sowohl, als nach
ibren Eigenschaften. Danzig.

Niedt, Friderich Erhard. 1700. Musicalische Handleitung, Part 1 Handelt vom
General-Bass. Hamburg. 2nd ed. 1710. Facs. Buren: Frits Knuf, 1976. English
translation in Poulin-Taylor 1988. All references here are to the 1710 edition.

. 1706. Musicalische Handleitung, Part 2 Handleitung zur Variation, wie

man den General-Bass und dariiber gesetzte Zahlen variiren, artige Inven-

tiones machen, und aus einen schlechten General-Bass Praeludia, Ciaconnen

... leichtlich verfertigen kénnen. Hamburg. 2nd ed. edited by Johann Matthe-

son. Hamburg, 1721. Facs. Buren: Frits Knuf, 1976. English translation in

Poulin-Taylor 1988. All references here are to the 1721 edition.

. 1717. Musicalische Handleitung, Part 3 Handlend vom Contra-Punct.
Edited by Johann Mattheson. Hamburg. Facs. Buren: Frits Knuf, 1976. En-
glish translation in Poulin-Taylor 1988.

Nottebohm, Gustav. 1872. Beethoveniana. Leipzig and Winterthur.

. 1873. Beethoven’s Studien I. Leipzig and Winterthur. Facs. Wiesbaden:
Séndig, 1971.

Osborne, Richard. 1966. “The Theoretical Writings of Abbé Pierre-Joseph Rous-
sier.” Ph.D. diss., Ohio State University.

Ozanam. 1691. Dictionaire mathematique. Amsterdam.

Palisca, Claude. 1956. “Vincenzo Galilei’s Counterpoint Treatise: A Code for the
Seconda Pratica.” Journal of the American Musicological Society 9:81-96.

. 1958. Article “Kontrapunkt” in MGG.

.. 1972a. “Marco Scacchi’s Defense of Modern Music 1649.” In Words and

Music, pp. 189-235. Edited by Laurence Berman. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-

vard University Press.

. 1972b. “Ut oratoria musica: The Rhetorical Basis of Musical Manner-

ism.” In The Meaning of Mannerism, pp. 37-61. Edited by Franklin Robinson

and Stephen Nichols, Jr. Hanover: University Press of New England.

. 1983. “The Artusi-Monteverdi Controversy.” In The Monteverdi Com-
panion. Edited by Denis Arnold and Nigel Fortune. 2nd. ed. London: Faber
& Faber.

Paolucci, Giuseppe. 1765-1772. Arte pratica di contrappunto dimostrata con
esempi di vari autori e con osservazioni. 3 vols. Venice.

Pascal, Blaise. [c. 1658]. Pensées. In Pascal Oeuvres Completes. N.p.: Macmillan,
1963.

Pasquali, Nicolo. 1757. Thorough-Bass Made Easy. Edinburgh. Editions and
French translation through c. 1810. Facs. of London, [c. 1765]. London:
Oxford University Press, c. 1974.

Bibliography


=== PAGE 350 ===

340

Paul, Charles. 1971. “Music and Ideology: Rameau, Rousseau, and 1789.” Jour-
nal of the History of Ideas 32:395—410.

Penna, Lorenzo. 1684. Li primi albori musicali. Bologna. Facs. Bologna: Forni,
1969. Other editions in 1672, 1679, 1696, and Antwerp, 1690. All references
are to 1684.

Pischner, Hans. 1963. Die Harmonielebre Jean-Philippe Rameaus: Ihre histo-
rischen Voraussetzungen und ihre Auswirkungen im franzOsischen, italien-
ischen und deutschen musiktheoretischen Schrifttum des 18. Jahrhunderts.
Leipzig: Breitkopf & Hartel.

Planchart, Alejandro. 1960. “A Study of the Theories of Giuseppe Tartini.” Jour-
nal of Music Theory 4: 32-61.

Pohl, Carl Ferdinand. 1875. Joseph Haydn. Berlin.

Poulin, Pamela, and Irmgard Taylor, 1988. The Musical Guide. Oxford: Claren-
don Press. Translation of Niedt 1700/1710, 1717, 1721.

Praetorius Michael. 1619. Syntagma musicum, 3. Wolfenbiittel. Facs. Kassel:
Barenreiter, 1959. Reprinted, edited by Eduard Bernoulli. Leipzig, 1916.
Preussner, Eberhard. 1924. Die Methodik im Schulgesang der evangelischen La-

teinschulen des 17. Jahrhunderts. Dissertation, University of Berlin.

Printz, Wolfgang Caspar. 1676-1696. Phrynis Mytilenaeus oder Satyrischer Com-
ponist. Vol. 1: Quedlinburg, 1676; Vol. 2: Sagan, 1677; Vols. 1-3: Dresden
and Leipzig, 1696. Reprint. Dresden, 1744.

Purcell, Henry. 1694. “A Brief Introduction to the Art of Descant; or, Composing
Music in Parts.” In John Playford, A Breefe Introduction to the Skill of
Musick, 1694 ed. Facs. New York: Da Capo, 1972.

Quantz, Johann Joachim. 1752. Versuch einer Anweisung, die Flote traversiere zu
spielen. Berlin. Reprinted Wroclaw, 1780, 1789. Translations into French,
Dutch, English, 1752-c. 1780.

Quirsfeld, Johann. 1675. Breviarium musicum. Dresden. Later editions through
1717.

Rameau, Jean-Philippe. 1722. Traité de l’harmonie. Paris. Facs. in Rameau CTW
1. English translation of Book 3. London, 1752, 1779. English translation of
Book 4. London, c. 1795, c. 1805. English translation in Gossett 1971.

. 1726. Nouveau Systéme de musique théorique . . . pour servir d’intro-

duction au traité de ’harmonie. Paris. Facs. in Rameau CTW 2. English

translation in Chandler 1975.

. 1729-1731. Article exchange (possibly with Michel Pignolet de Monté-

clair) in Mercure de France. Facs. in Rameau CTW 6. Partial English trans-

lation in Keane 1961, pp. 81-112.

. 1732. Dissertation sur les différentes métodes d’accompagnement .. .

avec le plan d’une nouvelle métode. Facs. in Rameau CTW 5. 2nd ed. c.

1772. English translation in Hayes 1974 .

. 1736. “Lettre de M. Rameau au R. P. Castel.” Journal de Trévoux,

Pp. 1691-1709. Facs. in Rameau CTW 6.

. 1737. Generation harmonique, ou Traité de musique théorique et pra-

tique. Facs. in Rameau CTW 3. English translation in Hayes 1974b.

. c. 1740. L’Art de la basse fondamentale. Ms. (see Christensen 1987a).

Gianotti 1759 is closely based on this treatise (Christensen 19904).

Bibliography


=== PAGE 351 ===

. 1750. Démonstration du principe de l’harmonie, servant de base 4 tout
Part musical théorique & pratique. Facs. in Rameau CTW 3. English trans-
lation in Briscoe 1975.

. 1752. “Extrait d’une réponse de M. Rameau a M. Euler, sur V’identité des

octaves.” Mercure de France, December, 1752, pp. 6-31. Facs. in Rameau

CTW 5. Published Paris, 1753.

. 1754. Observations sur notre instinct pour la musique, et sur son principe.

Facs. in Rameau CTW 3.

. [1761]. Code de musique pratique .. . avec de nouvelles réflexions sur le

principe sonore. Facs. in Rameau CTW 4. Dated 1760 on title page (see

Rameau CTW 4, pp. xxxix—xl).

. 1762. Origine des sciences. Facs. in Rameau CTW 4.

. 1763-1764. Vérités également ignorées et intéressantes tirées du sein de

la nature. Ms. published in Schneider 1986.

. CTW. The Complete Theoretical Writings of Jean-Philippe Rameau. 6
vols. Edited by Erwin Jacobi. N.p.: American Institute of Musicology, 1967—
1972.

Ramler, Karl. 1758. Einleitung in die schénen Wissenschaften. Berlin. Translation
of Batteux 1746. Later editions.

Ratner, Leonard. 1949. “Harmonic Aspects of Classic Form.” Journal of the
American Musicological Society 2: 159-168.

. 1956. “Eighteenth-Century Theories of Musical Period Structure.” Mus-

ical Quarterly 42:439-454.

. 1970. “Ars combinatoria, Chance and Choice in Eighteenth-Century

Music.” In Studies in Eighteenth-Century Music, pp. 343—63. Edited by R.

E. Chapman and H. C. Robbins Landon. New York: Oxford University Press.

. 1980. Classic Music: Expression, Form, and Style. New York: Schirmer
Books.

Reed, Nola. 1983. “The Theories of Joseph Riepel as Expressed in His Anfangs-
griinde zur Musicalischen Setzkunst.” Ph.D. diss., University of Rochester.

Reilly, Allyn. 1980. “Georg Andreas Sorge’s Vorgemach der musicalischen Com-
position: A Translation and Commentary.” Ph.D. diss., Northwestern Uni-
versity. Translation of Sorge [1745].

Rempp, Frieder. 1980. Die Kontrapunkttraktate Vincenzo Galileis. Cologne: Arno
Volk Verlag.

Riedt, Friedrich Wilhelm. 1756. “Tabellen tiber alle drey- und vierstimmige . . .
Grundaccorde.” In Marpurg 1754-1778, 2:387—413.

Riemann, Hugo. 1893. Vereinfachte Harmonielehre. London. English translation
in Bewerunge [1895].

. 1898. Geschichte der Musiktheorie im IX.-X1X. Jahrhundert. Leipzig.
2nd ed. 1921. Facs. Hildesheim: Olms, 1961. English translation in Haggh
1962 and Mickelsen 1977.

Riepel, Joseph. 1752. Anfangsgriinde zur musicalischen Setzkunst: De rhythmo-
poeia, oder von der Tactordnung. Frankfurt and Leipzig.

. 1755. Grundregeln zur Tonordnung insgemein. Frankfurt and Leipzig.

. 1757. Griindliche Erklaérung der Tonordnung insbesondere. Frankfurt

and Leipzig.

Bibliography

341


=== PAGE 352 ===

. 1765. Erlauterung der betriiglichen Tonordnung. Augsburg.

——. 1768. Unentbehrliche Anmerkungen zum Contrapunct. Augsburg.

. 1786. Bafschliissel. Regensburg. Edited by Johann Kaspar Schubarth.

Rivera, Benito. 1977. Synopsis of New Music. Colorado Springs: Colorado College
Music Press. Translation of Lippius 1612.

. 1978. “The Isagoge (1581) of Johannes Avianius: An Early Formulation

of Triadic Theory.” Journal of Music Theory 22:43—64.

. 1979. “Harmonic Theory in Musical Treatises of the Late Fifteenth and

Early Sixteenth Centuries.” Music Theory Spectrum 1:80-95.

. 1980. German Music Theory in the Early Seventeenth Century: The
Treatises of Johannes Lippius. Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press.

Robert, Walter. 1961. Compendium of Music. N.p.: American Institute of Musi-
cology. Translation of Descartes 1618.

Rosen, Charles. 1980. Sonata Forms. New York: W. W. Norton.

Rousseau, Jean Jacques. 1753. Lettre sur la musique francaise. Paris. Partial
English translation in Strunk 1950.

. 1768. Dictionnaire de musique. Paris. Facs. Hildesheim: Olms, 1969.
Many later transformations. English translation, London, [c. 1775].

Roussier, Pierre-Joseph. 1764. Traité des accords, et leur succession, selon le
systéme de la basse-fondamentale. Paris and Lyon.

. [1765]. Observations sur différens points d’harmonie. Geneva and Paris.
Erroneously dated 1755 on the title page; p. 29 refers to reviews of Roussier
1764 that appeared early in 1765.

St. Lambert. 1702. Les principes du clavecin. Paris. Facs. Geneva: Minkoff, 1974.
English translation in Harris-Warrick 1984. See Harris-Warrick 1984, p. ix,
concerning the erroneous use of Michel as his given name.

. 1707. Nouveau traité de l’'accompagnement. Paris. Reprint Amsterdam,
c. 1710. Facs. Geneva: Minkoff, 1974. See Harris-Warrick 1984, pp. viii-ix
and Arnold 1931, pp. 900-901 concerning the lingering error that there was
a 1680 edition.

Scheibe, Johann Adolph. c. 1730. Compendium musices. Ms. published in Benary
[1961].

.. 1737-1740. Der critische Musicus. Hamburg. Facs. Amsterdam: Antiqua,

1966.

. 1773. Ueber die Musikalische Composition; Die Theorie der Melodie und
Harmonie. Leipzig, 1773-

Schenker, Heinrich. 1930. “Rameau oder Beethoven? Erstarrung oder geistiges
Leben in der Musik?” Das Meisterwerk in der Musik 3:9-24. Facs. Hildes-
heim: Olms, 1974. English translation in Kalib 1973.

. 1954. Harmony. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Translation by

Elisabeth Mann Borgese of Neue Musikalische Theorien und Phantasien, I:

Harmonielehre. Stuttgart, Berlin, and Vienna, 1906.

. 1987. Counterpoint. New York: G. Schirmer. Translation by John Roth-
geb of Neue Musikalische Theorien und Phantasien, I: Kontrapunkt. Stutt-
gart, Berlin, and Vienna, 1910-1922.

Schering, Arnold. 1931. Geschichte der Musik in Beispielen. Leipzig.

Bibliography


=== PAGE 353 ===

Schneider, Herbert. 1973. “Charles Masson und sein Nouveau traité.” Archiv fiir
Musikwissenschaft 30:245-274.

. 1986. Jean-Philippe Rameaus letzter Musiktraktat. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner
Verlag. Publication of Rameau 1763-1764.

Schnoebelen, Anne. 1979. Padre Martini’s Collection of Letters in the Civico
Museo Bibliografico Musicale in Bologna. New York: Pendragon.

Schoenberg, Arnold. 1946. “Criteria for the Evaluation of Music.” In Style and
Idea, pp. 124-136. Edited by Leonard Stein. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press, 1975.

. 1950. “Composition with Twelve Tones.” In Style and Idea, pp. 214-
245. Edited by Leonard Stein. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1975.

Scholes, Percy. 1959. Charles Burney: An 18th-Century Musical Tour. London:
Oxford University Press.

Schréter, Christoph Gottlob. 1772. Deutliche Anweisung zum General-Bass.
Halberstadt. Possibly completed by 1754 (date in preface; see Buelow
1980b).

Schulz, Johann Abraham Peter. 1800. “Ueber die in Sulzers Theorie der schénen
Kiinste .. .” Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung, 2:257-265, 273-280.

Schulze, Hans-Joachim. 1972. Dokumente zum Nachwirken J. S. Bachs 1750—
1800. Kassel: Barenreiter.

. 1984. Studien zur Bach-Ueberlieferung im 18. Jahrhundert. Leipzig: Edi-
tion Peters.

Schwarzmaier, Ernst. 1936. Die Takt- und Tonordnung Joseph Riepels: Ein Bei-
trag zur Geschichte der Formenlehre im 18. Jabrhundert. Wolfenbiittel: Ver-
lag fiir musikalische Kultur und Wissenschaft.

Seay, Albert. 1961. The Art of Counterpoint. Translation of Tinctoris 1477. N.p.:
American Institute of Musicology.

Serre, Jean-Adam. 1753. Essais sur les principes de l’harmonie. Paris. Probably
appeared in late 1752 (Rameau CTW 3, p. Ixv). Facs. New York: Broude,
1967.

. 1763. Observations sur les principes de l’harmonie. Geneva. Facs. New
York: Broude, 1967.

Serwer, Howard. 1970. “Marpurg vs. Kirnberger: Theories of Fugal Composi-
tion.” Journal of Music Theory 14:209-236.

. 1980. “Johann Friedrich Marpurg.” In The New Grove.

Seyfried, Ignaz Xaver Ritter von. [c. 1825]. J. G. Albrechtsberger’s sammtliche
Schriften. Vienna. Facs. Kassel: Barenreiter, 1975. 2nd ed., 1837. Translations
into French (1830) and English (c. 1834, 1842, and 1855).

. 1832. Ludwig van Beethoven’s Studien im Generalbasse, Contrapuncte
und in der Compositions-Lehre. Vienna. Several later editions and transla-
tions.

Sheldon, David. 1989. Marpurg’s ‘Thoroughbass and Composition Handbook’:
A Narrative Translation and Critical Study. Stuyvesant, N.Y.: Pendragon
Press.

Shirlaw, Matthew. 1917. The Theory of Harmony. London: Novello. Facs.

Bibliography

343


=== PAGE 354 ===

344

DeKalb, Ill.: Coar, 1955; New York: Da Capo Press, 1969; Sarasota, Fla.:
Coar, 1970 (as The Theory and Nature of Harmony, with an appended essay).

Signoretti. 1777. Traité du Contrepoint par P. Signoretti dédié a Mrs. les amateurs.
Rennes.

Sisman, Elaine. 1982. “Small and Expanded Forms: Koch’s Model and Haydn’s
Music.” Musical Quarterly 68: 444-475.

Smith, Charles $. 1960. “Leonhard Euler’s Tentamen novae theoriae musicae: A
Translation and Commentary.” Translation of Euler 1739. Ph.D. diss., Uni-
versity of Indiana.

Snook, Susan. 1978. “J. F. Daube’s Der musikalischen Dilettant: Eine Abhandlung
der Komposition (1773): A Translation and Commentary.” Ph.D. diss., Stan-
ford University.

Soler, Antonio. 1762. Llave de la modulacion . . . theorica y practica . . . desde
el tiempo de Juan de Muris, hasta hoy. Madrid. Facs. New York: Broude,
1967.

Sorge, Georg Andreas. [1745-1747]. Vorgemach der musicalischen Composition;
oder . . . Anweisung zum General-Bass. Lobenstein. 3 vols. Dates at end of
dedication. English translation in Reilly 1980.

. [1753]. Ausweichungs-Tabellen, in welchen auf vierfache Art gezeiget

wird, wie eine jede Tonart in ihre Neben-Tonarten ausweichen kénne.

Nuremberg.

. [1760]. Compendium harmonicum; oder, kurzer Begrif der Lehre von der

Harmonie, vor diejenigen, welche den Generalbass und die Composition

studiren. Lobenstein. Date at end of dedication. Partial reprint in Marpurg

1760. English translation in Martin 1981.

. [1767]. Anleitung zur Fantasie .. . nach theoretischen und practischen
Grundsdtzen, wie solche die Natur des Klangs lebret. Lobenstein. Date at end
of dedication.

Spazier, Karl. 1800. “Einige Worte zur Rechtfertigung Marpurgs, und zur Erin-
nerung an seine Verdienste.” Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung, 2:593—600.

Speer, Daniel. 1697. Grund-richtiger! kurtz-leicht-und N6thiger/ jetzt Wol-ver-
mebrter Unterricht der Musicalischen Kunst. Ulm. Expanded 2nd ed. of 1687
work. Facs. Leipzig: VEB Edition Peters, 1974.

Spiess, Meinrad. 1745. Tractatus musicus compositorio-practicus. Augsburg. 2nd
ed. 1746.

Spitta, Philipp. 1889. Johann Sebastian Bach. English translation by Clara Bell
and J. A. Fuller-Maitland. London, 1889. Facs. New York: Dover, 1951.
Original edition, Leipzig, 1873-1880.

Stevens, Jane. 1971. “An Eighteenth-Century Description of Concerto First-Move-
ment Form.” Journal of the American Musicological Society 24:85—95.

Stierlein, Johann Christoph. 1691. Trifolium musicale. Stuttgart.

Stillingfleet, Benjamin. 1771. Principles and Power of Harmony. London.

Stillings, Frank. 1963. The Practical Harmonist at the Harpsichord. New Haven:
Yale School of Music, and Yale University Press, 1968. Translation of Gas-
parini 1708.

Bibliography


=== PAGE 355 ===

Strunk, Oliver. 1950. Source Readings in Music History. New York: W. W.
Norton.

Suaudeau, René. 1958. Le Premier systéme harmonique (dit Clermontois) de Jean-
Philippe Rameau. Typescript. Clermont-Ferrand. Summary in Chailley 1965,
PP. 77-79.

. 1960. Introduction a l’harmonie de Rameau. Clermont-Ferrand: Ecole
Nationale de Musique de Clermont-Ferrand.

Sulzer, Johann Georg. 1771-1774. Allgemeine Theorie der schénen Kiinste. Leip-
zig. Numerous reprints through 1798. Facs. of the 1792~—1794 edition. Hil-
desheim: Olms, 1967-1970. The music articles were written by Kirnberger
and, probably, his pupil Johann Abraham Peter Schulz (see p. 240).

Tartini, Giuseppe. 1754. Trattato di musica secondo la vera scienza dell’ armonia.
Padua. Facs. New York: Broude, 1966; Le Opere di Giuseppe Tartini II/1
(Padua, 1973). English translation in Johnson 1985.

. 1767. Riposta . . . alla critica del di lui Trattato di musica di Mons. Le
Serre. Venice.

Telemann, Georg Michael. 1773. Unterricht im Generalbass Spielen. Hamburg.

Telemann, Georg Philipp. 1730. Fast allgemeines Evangelisch-Musicalisches
Lieder-Buch . . . [mit] Unterrichte, der unter andern zur vierstimmigen Com-
position und zum damit verkntipften General-Basse anleitet. Hamburg.

. 1733-1734. Singe-, Spiel- und General-Bass-Uebungen. Hamburg.

Tigrini, Orazio. 1588. I! compendio della musica. Venice. Facs. New York:
Broude, 1966.

Tinctoris, Johannes. 1477. Liber de arte contrapuncti. Ms. English translation in
Seay 1961. All references are to this translation.

Treiber, Johann Philipp. 1704. Der accurate Organist im General-Bass. Jena.

Trydell, John. 1766. Two Essays on the Theory and Practice of Music. Dublin.
Reprinted as “Music” in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1st ed., Edinburgh,
1771.

Tirk, Daniel Gottlob. 1789. Klavierschule. Leipzig and Halle. Later editions 1800
and Vienna, 1798. Facs. of the 1789 edition. Kassel: Barenreiter, 1962, 1967.
English translations by C. G. Naumberger (London, 1804) and in Haggh
1982,

. 1791. Kurze Anweisung zum Generalbafspielen. Halle and Leipzig. Re-
print in 1800. Facs. Amsterdam: Frits Knuf, 1971.

Twittenhoff, Wilhelm. 1935. Die musiktheoretischen Schriften Joseph Riepels.
Halle/Salle: Buchhandlung des Waisenhauses.

Vallotti, Francesco Antonio. 1779. Della scienza teorica e pratica. Padua. Re-
mainder of the treatise in -Vallotti 1950.

. 1950. Trattato della moderna musica. Padua: Il Messaggero di S. Antonio.
Includes Vallotti 1779 and three additional parts.

Vandermonde, Alexandre-Théophile. 1778. Second Mémoire sur un nouveau sys-
téme d’harmonie applicable 4 l’état de la musique. N.p.

Verba, Cynthia. 1973. “The Development of Rameau’s Thoughts on Modulation
and Chromatics.” Journal of the American Musicological Society 26:69-91.

Bibliography

345


=== PAGE 356 ===

346

. 1978. “Rameau’s Views on Modulation and Their Background in French
Theory.” Journal of the American Musicological Society 31:467—479.

Viadana, Lodovico Grossi da. 1602. Cento concerti ecclesiastici ... con il basso
continuo. Venice. Many later editions. English translation in Arnold 1931.

Vial, Francgois-Guillaume. [c. 1767]. Arbre Généalogique de l’harmonie. Paris.
Date according to publication privilege dated January 9, 1767 (Brenet 1906—
1907:456).

Vicentino, Nicola. 1555. L’antica musica ridotta alla moderna prattica. Rome.
Facs. Kassel: Barenreiter, 1956.

Vion, Charles Antoine. 1742. La musique pratique et theorique, réduite a ses
principes naturels. Paris.

Vivian, Percival. 1909. Campion’s Works. London: Oxford, 1909.

Vogler, Georg Joseph. 1776. Tonwissenschaft und Tonsezkunst. Mannheim. Facs.
Hildesheim: Olms, 1970.

. [1778]. Kubrpfalzische Tonschule. 2 vols. Mannheim.

. 1778-1781. Betrachtungen der Mannheimer Tonschule. 3 vols. Mann-
heim. Facs. Hildesheim: Olms, 1974.

Wagner, Giinther. 1984. “Anmerkungen zur Formtheorie H. C. Kochs.” Archiv
fiir Musikwissenschaft 41:86-112.

Wallace, Barbara. 1983. “J. F. Daube’s General-Bass in drey Accorden (1756): A
Translation and Commentary.” Ph.D. diss., North Texas University.

Walther, Johann Gottfried. 1708. Praecepta der musicalischen Composition. Ms.
published by Peter Benary. Leipzig: Breitkopf & Hartel, 1955. All references
are to this edition.

. 1732. Musicalisches Lexicon. Leipzig. Facs. Kassel: Barenreiter, 1953.

Wason, Robert. 1985. Viennese Harmonic Theory from Albrechtsberger to
Schenker and Schoenberg. Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press.

Werckmeister, Andreas. 1697. Hypomnemata musica . . . insonderheit von der
Composition und Temperatur. Quedlinburg. Facs. Hildesheim: Olms, 1970.

. [1698]. Die nothwendigsten Anmerkungen und Regeln wie der Bassus

continuus oder General-Bass wol kGnne tractiret werden. Aschersleben. Date

appears in the introduction to Werckmeister 1702. Reprinted 1715.

. 1700. Cribrum musicum. Quedlinburg. Facs. Hildesheim: Olms, 1970.

. 1702. Harmonologia musica, oder kurtze Anleitung zur musicalischen
Composition, wie man vermittels der Regeln und Anmerckungen bey den
General-Bass einen Contrapunctum simplicem . . . componiren und ex tem-
pore spielen. Frankfurt and Leipzig. Facs. Hildesheim: Olms, 1970.

Westbladh, Tobias. 1727. De triade harmonica. Uppsala.

Wideburg, Johann Friedrich Michael. 1765-1775. Der sich selbst informirende
Clavierspieler. 3 vols. Leipzig and Halle, 1765; Halle, 1767 and 1775. Au-
thor’s name spelled Wiedeburg in volume 1.

Wilson, Dora Jean. 1979. “Georg Simon Lohlein’s Klavierschule: Translation and
Commentary.” Ph.D. diss., University of Southern California. Translation of
Léhlein 1765 and 1781.

Wolff, Christoph. 1968. Der stile antico in der Musik Johann Sebastian Bachs.
Wiesbaden: F. Steiner, 1968.

Bibliography


=== PAGE 357 ===

Wollenberg, Susan. 1970. “The Unknown ‘Gradus.’” Music and Letters 51:423-
434.

Young, Irwin. 1969. English translation of Gafori 1496. Madison: 1969.

Zacconi, Lodovico. 1622. Prattica di musica seconda parte. Venice. Facs. Bologna:
Forni, 1967; Hildesheim: Olms, 1982.

Zarlino, Gioseffo. 1558. Istitutioni harmoniche. Venice. Facs. New York: Broude,
1965. Reprinted 1561, 1562, 1572. English translation of Book 3 in Marco-
Palisca 1968. English translation of Book 4 in Vered Cohen 1983. All refer-
ences are to these translations.

. 1562. Nove madrigali a cinque voci. Reprinted, edited by Siro Cisilino.

Venice: Istituto per la collaborazioni culturale, [1963].

. 1571. Dimostrationi harmoniche. Venice. Facs. Ridgewood, New Jersey:

Gregg, 1966.

. 1573. Istitutioni harmoniche. 2nd ed. Venice. Facs. Ridgewood, New

Jersey: Gregg, 1966.

. 1588. Sopplimenti musicali. Venice. Facs. New York: Broude, 1979.

Bibliography 347


=== PAGE 358 ===

BLANK PAGE


=== PAGE 359 ===

Index

Académie royale des sciences, 147

Accademia delle Scienze dell’ Istituto di
Bologna, 147, 148, 178

Added-sixth chord, 100, 132-135, 153,
220-221, 237, 241

Adlung, Jacob, 151

Agricola, Johann Friedrich, 218, 219, 222,
256

Albert, Heinrich, 49n, 50

Albrechtsberger, Johann Georg, 13, 163,
176, 186, 217, 257, 320-321; on
harmony, 45, 47, 93, 188-189, 190,
204, 281; on solmization, 171-172;
composition method, 187—189; on
fugue, 191

Aleatory, 174

D’Alembert, Jean le Rond, 144-146, 147,
149, 150, 200, 233, 254, 255, 256. See
also Marpurg, Friedrich Wilhelm

Aler, Paul, 47

Alfabeto, 51

Allerup, Albert, 171

Antoniotto, Giorgio, 224-226, 229, 241n

Arnold, Franck Thomas, 49n, 51, 61, 159

Artusi, Giovanni Maria, 9, 20-21, 24, 35,
38, 178, 253

Attwood, Thomas, 182-183

Augmented-sixth chord, 75, 195, 270

Avianius, Johannes, 96-97

Avison, Charles, 224

Azopardi, Francesco, 34

Bach, Carl Philipp Emanuel, 31n, 50, 51,
63, 69, 74, 113, 176, 226, 228, 234,
236, 237, 239, 243, 257, 260; on
thoroughbass and composition, 52, 65;
and chord inversions, 55, 58, 62, 1773
dictum on Rameau, 93-94, 232, 240n,

253-256; as composer, 197, 219, 222,
223, 290

Bach, Johann Christian, 298

Bach, Johann Nicolaus, 124-125

Bach, Johann Sebastian, 93, 214n, 218,
219, 232, 233, 239, 254-255; On
species counterpoint, 31n, 256;
Well-Tempered Clavier, 45, 74, 82-87,
247-249; on thoroughbass, 49, 54, 653
Sonata in g for violin solo, 59; French
Suite in E, 221-222

Bach, Wilhelm Friedemann, 197, 218, 219,
222, 255n

Baker, Nancy, 109, 260n, 275n, 277,
287n, 288n, 289n, 297n

Banchieri, Adriano, 24

Baron, Ernst Gottlieb, 51, 222-223

Bartolomi, Angelo Michele, 99

Basso continuo, 49. See also Thoroughbass

Basso seguente, 49

Bass pedal, 45, 237

Battente, 99

Batteux, Charles, 297

Beach, David, 190n, 239n, 240n, 244,
248n, 254-255

Beethoven, Ludwig van, 59, 157,
167-168, 171, 204, 210, 256, 260n;
and species counterpoint, 31-32, 34, 36,
47; studies with Albrechtsberger, 187,
190-191, 321

Bemetzrieder, Anton, 146, 205

Benary, Peter, 31n, 48

Benda, Franz and Georg Anton, 197

Berardi, Angel, 28-30, 32, 253

Berger, Karol, 19

Bernard, Jonathan, 196

Bernhard, Christoph, 15, 21-23, 24,

27-28, 35, 36, 38, 63, 159, 163


=== PAGE 360 ===

35°

Bernoulli, Jean, 147

Béthizy, Jean Laurent de, 116, 207, 211

Bianciardi, Francesco, 50

Blainville, Charles, 154-155

Blankenburg, Quirinus van, 152

Blow, John, 49n, 53

Boethius, 169

Bononcini, Giovanni Maria, 28—30, 32,
33, 48, 253

Bontempi, Andrea, 15, 45

Breitinger, Johann Jakob, 255

Brenet, Michel, 72

Brentlinger, Lee, 305

Brofsky, Howard, 180

Brossard, Sébastien de, 30, 63, 77, 86,
118, 154, 170-171, 253

Buelow, George, 165

Burmeister, Joachim, 97, 165

Burney, Charles, 224, 231, 240, 259n

Buttstett, Johann Heinrich, 169-170, 171

Cadence, 18-19, 79-81, 116-119, 279,
284-285

Cadence rompué, 118

Cadential 6/4, 65, 116-117, 140, 243

Campion, Frangois, 51, 52, 66, 69, 72-76,
99, I10n

Campion, Thomas, 98

Caplin, William, 140

Capri, Antonio, 197n

Castel, Louis Bertrand, 124, 127, 131,
143, 147, 149

Castrati, 169, 195

Catel, Charles-Simon, 116n

Chord inversions, 18, 42, 51, 55-56, 76,
96-105, 178-179, 204-206

Chord numbers, 106, 108, 207-208

Chords: in thoroughbass, 53-61, 88; and
expression of a key, 53-54, 69-82; in
seventeenth-century theory, 96-100. See
also under individual theorists’ names

Christensen, Thomas, 51, 60, 72, 94n,
95n, 99N, III, 128n, 130, 144, 145,
218n

Circle of keys, 215-216

Clavecin oculaire, 143

Clement, 121, 211

Cohen, Albert, rorn, 111, 147, 198

Combination tones, 198-199

Corelli, Arcangelo, 29, 76, 138, 139, 225,
305-319

Corps sonore, 148-149. See also
Harmonic resonance

Counterpoint, 155; as a term, 26-27, 68,
280; influenced by harmonic theory, 93,

175-192

Index

Couperin, Frangois, 50, 53, 56
Cyr, Mary, 94

Dahlhaus, Carl, 1, 22, 99, 136, 165, 275n,
283n, 293n, 298

Damschroder, David, 94

Dandrieu, Jean-Francois, 60, 132

Daube, Johann Friedrich, 31, 50,
200-204, 216, 231, 233n, 254, 259n

Delair, Denis, 51, 53, 55, 61-62, 99, 112,
117

Deppert, Heinrich, 82n

Descartes, René, 91, 102, 127, 128

Deshayes, Thérése, 144

Deutsch, Otto Erich, 174

Dice games, 176

Diderot, Denis, 130, 143, 144, 146, 200,
205

Diminished-seventh chord, 75, 114-115

Diminution: and species counterpoint, 27,
30, 36-41; and thoroughbass, 37,
63-68, 80-81; in Lippius, 97-98

Diruta, Girolamo, 24, 27-30, 33, 40

Dissonances, role of: in Zarlino, 19-20; in
seconda pratica, 20-23; in
thoroughbass, 40, 58-59, 62-65; in
Rameau, 40, 117-119, 135-140

Dissonances resolving to dissonances: in
C. P. E. Bach, 63; in Heinichen, 63-65;
in Mattheson, 160-161; in Koch,
279-280

Dominant tonic, 108

Double emploi, 133-135, 179-180, 220,
225, 237

Duchez, Marie-Elisabeth, 128n

Duckles, Vincent, 175

Diirr, Alfred, 82n

Earhart, A. Louise Hall, 207n

Ebner, Wolfgang, 50

Eleventh chord. See Subposition

Encyclopaedia Britannica, 144, 208

Encyclopédie, 145, 146, 149

Enlightenment, The, 47, 68, 91, 107,
139n, 146-150, 168, 172, 175-176,
199-200, 228-229, 255, 274

Euler, Leonhard, 103, 147, 148, 200

Faber, Heinrich, 171

Federhofer, Hellmut, 20, 21, 48, 182,
185n, 187

Feil, Arnold, 48, 66n, 228n, 240, 260n

Fellerer, Karl Gustav, 218n

Ferris, Joan, 94n, 109n, III, 133

Figurenlebre, 21-22, 163

Fleury, Nicolas, 99


=== PAGE 361 ===

Foggia, Francesco, 180

Fontenelle, Bernard, 128

Forkel, Johann Nicolaus, 175, 255

Form, 168, 260n, 261-272, 288, 290-297

Framery, Nicolas, 33-34

Franklin, Benjamin, 187

Frére, Alexandre, 87, 170

Fugue, 32, 60, 166-167, 191, 246-249

Fuller, David, 60

Fundamental bass: in Rameau, 105-106,
ILI-113, 115; in Martini, 180-181; in
Mozart, 183-187; in Kirnberger, 186n,
241-243, 250-251; in Serre, 200; in
Vogler, 209; in Nichelmann, 218-224;
in Léhlein, 224; in Antoniotto,
224-226; in Manfredini, 226; in
Marpurg, 231-232, 234-235

Fux, Johann Joseph, 26-48, 63, 69, 123,
126, 163, 164, 167, 169-170, I7I, 172,
178, 186, 187, 190n, 196, 212, 251,
253, 256, 259, 260, 262, 270; and
Zarlino, 14-15; four rules of
counterpoint, 31-32, 160, 161, 201,
238; on triads, 41-45; and Niedt,
67-68; on fugue, 191

Gafori, Franchino, 17

Galilei, Vincenzo, 20, 24

Gasparini, Francesco, 54, 62, 201, 202,
236-237; on unfigured basses, 69, 71-72

Geminiani, Francesco, 173, 200

Gerber, Ernst Ludwig, 153

Gerigk, Herbert, 228

Gessele, Cynthia, 33, 148

Gianotti, Pietro, 95n, 111, 205, 216, 231

Girdlestone, Cuthbert, 94, 138n, 143, 147,
149

Glarean, Heinrich, 169, 253

Goldschmidt, Hugo, 218n, 219

Gombert, Nicolas, 35

Gossett, Philip, 95

Grant, Cecil Powell, 239n, 240n, 255

Graun, Johann Gottlieb and Karl Heinrich,
197, 218, 219, 290, 298

Grave, Floyd and Margaret, 208

Grenerin, Henri, 99

Gribenski, Jean, 146

Guido d’Arezzo, 46, 169

Guitar, 51, 76, 99

Gunn, Barnabas, 174

Hahn, Georg Joachim Joseph, 74, 202, 254

Hahn, Kurt, 166

Handel, George Frideric, 60, 222

Harmonic resonance, 127-131, 145, 1725
194, 241, 275-276

Harmonic syncopation, 113, 180, 211

Harnish, Otto Siegfried, 42, 97

Hasse, Johann Adolph, 219

Hawkins, John, 224

Haydn, Joseph, 167, 228, 260n; and
species counterpoint, 31, 32, 34, 35,
177, 187, 191, 234, 273, 290; and
solmization, 46, 171

Hayes, Deborah, 131

Hayes, William, 173-174

Heartz, Daniel, 185n

Heck, John Jasper, 196

Heinichen, Johann David, 50, 51, 52, 53,
60, 66, 68, 170, 171, 201, 236, 254,
259, 265; borrowings from Rameau,
55-56, 125-126; on dissonances, 58,
62, 63—65; on unfigured basses, 69, 70,
72-73, 77-82; on rhetoric, 165; on
keys, 215

Helm, Ernest Eugene, 218n, 222, 226

Herbst, Johann Andreas, 163

Hermaphrodites, 195

Hesse, Johann Heinrich, 55

Hidden fifths and octaves, 14, 40

Hiller, Johann Adam, 68

Hilse, Walter, 21

Holden, John, 208

Horsley, Imogene, 191

Humanism, 8, 9-10

Imperfect cadence, 116n. See also
Cadence; Rameau Jean-Philippe

Improvisation: and species counterpoint,
30-31; and thoroughbass, 51-52, 60,
267

Irregular cadence, 116. See also Cadence;
Rameau, Jean-Philippe

Irregular fourth, 62, 270, 279

Jacobi, Erwin, 94, 147, 149-150, 200n
Jamard, Canon, 194

Janowka, Thomas Balthasar, 170
Jeppesen, Knud, 14, 35, 41

Josquin des Prés, 35

Journals, 168, 233-234

Keane, Sister Mary, 94n

Keiler, Allan, 105

Keiser, Reinhard, 218

Keller, Godfrey, 54, 96

Kellner, David, 51, 86, 125-126, 254

Key changes, 82-86, 184, 216-217,
281-284

Keys, 73; opposed to modes, 31n, 35, 44,
169-171; and thoroughbass, 88;
relationships among, 215-216

Index

351


=== PAGE 362 ===

352

Key signatures, 59, 73

Kircher, Athanasius, 253

Kirnberger, Johann Philipp, 93, 135, 170,
176, 177, 196, 197, 207, 208, 209,
2II-212, 217, 223-224, 239-257,
259N, 260n, 275, 276n, 278-279, 280,
283; on fundamental bass, 186n,
241-243, 250-251; On counterpoint,
1903 on permutations, 228; dispute with
Marpurg, 231-243; on suspensions,
242-243; on 6/4 chords, 243

Knouse, Nola Reed, 289n. See also Reed,
Nola

Koch, Heinrich Christoph, 27, 66n, 93,
I2I, 124, 135, 177, 204, 210, 217,
260n, 267, 269, 273-302; on harmony,
275-285; on melody and phrasing,
285-289; on form, 290-297; on
compositional method, 297-299

Kohlschiitter, Bernd, 51

Kramer, Richard, 168, 245n

Krehbiel, James, 153, 197n

Kuhnau, Johann, 166, 215

Ladewig, James, 173

Laisement, Balliére de, 194

Lampe, John Frederick, 151-152, 207

Lanfranco, Giovanni Maria, 26, 30

Langner, Thomas, 218n

Lassus, Roland de, 10

Levens, Charles, 140, 152-155, 243

Lewin, David, 115, 228n

Lippius, Johannes, 27, 37, 42, 55, 97-98,
190, 229, 241

Locke, John, 91

Locke, Matthew, 49n

Léfgrén, Antonius, 125

Léhlein, Georg Simon, 74, 176, 196, 205,
206, 210, 224, 254

Lully, Jean-Baptiste, 131, 137-138, 147,
150, 219

Lusitano, Vicente, 30

Lute, 51

Madin, Henri, 30

Major and minor dissonance, 107, 116,
244

Malcolm, Alexander, 76-77

Manfredini, Vincenzo, 226

Mann, Alfred, 31, 34n, 36, 60, 185n, 187,
191

Marcello, Benedetto, 165

Marpurg, Friedrich Wilhelm, 56, 135, 175,
177, 205, 218, 228, 229, 231-239,
246-257, 259M, 260, 275, 2933
translator of D’Alembert, 144, 146, 194,

Index

219, 223, 254; and Rameau’s theories,
150; as journalist, 168, 233-234; on
fundamental bass, 186n, 234-235,
250-251; on fugue, 191, 246-249; and
Sorge, 194-197, 205-206, 211-212,
254; and Daube, 201; on subposition,
210-212, 251-252; on passing
dissonances, 212-214; dispute with
Kirnberger, 23 1-233, 246-257; on
Riepel, 267-268

Martini, Giovanni Battista, 30, 32, 44, 47,
69n, 74, 135, 147, 148, 177, 183, 190,
209, 213, 214, 256, 2573; composition
method, 178-182

Mason, Kevin, 72, 99n

Masson, Charles, 23, 116-117, 158

Mattheson, Johann, 31n, 35, 50, 53, 60,
66, 86, 98, 150, 151, 158-174, 190,
196, 197, 201, 215-216, 218, 223, 224,
233, 234, 254, 255, 256, 286, 297; on
harmony and melody, 123, 235; on
melodic structure, 161-168, 259

McArtor, Marion, 173n

Mekeel, Joyce, 235, 239n

Mersenne, Marin, 253

Mitchell, William, 56, 93

Mizler, Lorenz, 54, 89, 92, 151, 168; and
Fux, 31n, 47; and chord inversion, 98

Modes, 31n, 33, 35, 46, 169-171

Modulation, as a term, 2, 87, 153, 281,
305, 314

Monody, 162, 219-220

Montéclair, Michel Pignolet de, 144

Monteverdi, Claudio and Giulio, 20-21

Morales, Cristébal, 35

Mozart, Leopold, 197, 256, 268

Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 135,
182-187, 190, 228, 256, 260n, 268,
274, 298, 321; and species counterpoint,
31, 36, 45, 47, 935 177, 281; and
secondary dominants, 86; and
fundamental bass, 142-143, 203, 226;
and passing dissonances, 212; and key
change, 217

Muffat, Georg, 53, 54

Murschhauser, Franz Anton Xaver, 171

Newman, William, 240

Newton, Isaac, 127, 128, 143

Nichelmann, Christoph, 93, 135, 142,
218-224, 229, 254, 255, 256, 265, 285

Niedt, Friderich Erhard, 27, 37, 50, 52,
53, 190, 229, 239, 258-259;
composition method, 66-68, 142-143,
162, 164, 265-267, 285

Ninth chords. See Subposition


=== PAGE 363 ===

Nonharmonic tones, 110, 209-214
Notes de goiit, 100
Nottebohm, Gustav, 256

Octave equivalence, 103, 148
Oldman, Cecil, 185n
Omnibus, 217-218
Osborne, Richard, 148
Ozanam, 170

Pacchioni, Antonio, 180-181

Palestrina, Giovanni de, 10, 14, 32, 34,
41, 46

Palisca, Claude, 20, 24, 165

Paolucci, Giuseppe, 181~182, 183, 205

Parallel consonances, 11-13

Parallel fifths and octaves, 11, 15, 160-161

Pardies, Ignace Gaston, 127

Partimento, 60, 176, 226

Pascal, Blaise, 103

Pasquali, Nicolo, 176

Passing chords, 79-81, 119-121,
219-221, 244-245

Paul, Charles, 149

Penna, Lorenzo, 50, 62, 215; on unfigured
basses, 69-71

Perfect cadence, 116. See also Cadence;
Rameau, Jean-Philippe

Permutation, 173, 226-229, 261

Phrase: in Mattheson, 164; in Riepel,
261-267; in Koch, 285-289

Plagal cadence, 116n

Planchart, Alejandro, 197n

Plato, 8, 23-24

Ployer, Barbara, 182-187

Polyody, 162, 219-220

La Poupliniére, 144

Praetorius, Michael, 49n

Preussner, Eberhard, 171n

Price, Robert, 198

Printz, Wolfgang Caspar, 162, 164, 219

Purcell, Henry, 50, 77

Pythagoras, 101-102

Quantz, Johann Joachim, 196, 197, 218,
224

Querelle des Bouffons, 149, 150

Quirsfeld, Johann, 171

Rameau, Jean-Philippe, 59, 60, 61,
90-157, 163, 178-180, 190, 199, 202,
204, 207, 209, 220, 229, 234, 235,
278-279, 284-285; and role of
dissonance, 40, 117-119, 135-140; and
voice leading, 52; and chord inversions,
55, 101-105; as speculative and

practical theorist, 91-93, 104; and
Nature, 92, 103, 130, 131; transmission
of his ideas, 93-94, 124-126, 143-155,
194-197, 200-204, 232-233, 236-244,
246-256, 260, 275-276; works, 94-96;
on chord types, 100, 106-107,
116-117; and thoroughbass, 100-101,
208; on string division, 101-105; on
generation of minor triad, 102-104,
128-129; on fundamental bass,
105-106, ILI—113, I1§—122, 232; on
chord functions, 107-108, 132-135;
on subposition, 108-114, 140; on
diminished-seventh chord, 115;
on chord successions, 115-122; on
cadences, 116-119, 284-2853
on cadential 6/4, 116-117, 140; on
stepwise progressions, 119; on
large-scale progressions, 119-122;
on accompanying, 122-123, 141-143;
on secondary dominants, 122-123, 283;
on harmony and melody, 123-124, 2233
and science, 127-131, 146-150, 178;
on double emploi, 133-135, 250; on
implied dissonance, 135-140, 237, 244,
250; on continuity, 135-137; on implied
chromatics, 137-138; on key changes,
137-138, 216; on fugue, 191; on
Corelli, 305-319

Ramler, Karl, 297

Rasgueado, 99

Ratner, Leonard, 163, 226, 260n, 275n,
290n, 293n

Reed, Nola, 260n. See also Knouse, Nola
Reed

Régle de l’octave, 44, §1, 60, 72-74, 135,
179

Rhetoric, 164-168, 259, 286

Riedt, Friedrich Wilhelm, r95n

Riemann, Hugo, 4, 8, 48, 96

Riepel, Joseph, 66n, 74, 151, 168, 177,
197, 223, 256, 258-272, 273, 287; on
keys, 215; on permutation, 226-228;
on melody and phrasing, 261-267,
290-292; on harmony, 270-271

Roman numerals. See Chord numbers

Romieu, Jean-Baptiste, 198

Rore, Cipriano de, 8

Rosen, Charles, 298

Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 60, 133, 138,
144, 149

Roussier, Pierre-Joseph, 148, 209

Royal Society of London, 147

St. Lambert, 50, 55, 58, 1323 on unfigured
basses, 69, 71-72

Index

ee)


=== PAGE 364 ===

Sammartini, Giovanni Battista, 180

Sauveur, Joseph, 127, 128, 130, 172

Scacchi, Marco, 24

Scarlatti, Alessandro, 79

Scheibe, Johann Adolph, 98, 133, 158,
168, 193, 195, 197; 233, 254, 256

Scheinpflug, Christoph Gotthelf, 290

Schenker, Heinrich, 36, 96, 106, 150, 157,
214, 274n

Schenkerian theory, 35-37, 219, 263

Schering, Arnold, 79

Schneider, Herbert, 95n

Schoenberg, Arnold, 139, 156

Schréter, Christoph, 13, 124-125, 194,
233M, 254

Schubarth, Johann Kaspar, 260

Schulz, Johann Abraham Peter, 240, 248n,
254

Schulze, Hans-Joachim, 221n

Schiitz, Heinrich, 21

Schwarzmaier, Ernst, 260n

Seconda pratica, 19-25, 28, 39, 49

Secondary dominant, 82-87, 217; in
Heinichen, 81; in Rameau, 122-123; in
Kirnberger, 244, 252; in Koch, 282-284

Serre, Jean-Adam, 173n, 200

Serwer, Howard, 233, 239n, 246

Seventh chords, 45-46, 55; in
thoroughbass, 62; in Rameau, 100,
106-108; vs. suspensions, 114; in
D’Alembert, 145-146; in Sorge, 195; in
Kirnberger, 241-243, 250-251; in
Koch, 276. See also Subposition

Seyfried, Ignaz Xaver Ritter von, 321

Shirlaw, Matthew, 4, 49n, 94n, 96, 103,
104, 109, 133, 235, 236

Siefert, Paul, 21

Signoretti, 192

Sisman, Elaine, 260n, 268, 275n, 290n

Six-four chord, 10, 65, 116-117, 140,
184, 205-206, 243

Snook, Susan, 200n, 204

Solmization, six-syllable, 31n, 46,
171-172, 188

Sorge, Georg Andreas, 150, 193-197, 198,
205-206, 207, 216, 217, 231, 234, 235,
237, 241, 255, 257

Soriano, Francesco, 35

Species counterpoint, 26-48; early
formulations, 27-30; improvised,
30-31; in Gradus ad parnassum,
31-48; in Haydn, 31, 32, 34, 35, 177,
187, 191, 234, 273, 290; in Mozart,
182, 186—187; in Albrechtsberger,
187-189

Index

Speer, Daniel, 54, 70

Spiess, Meinrad, 256

Spitta, Philipp, 82n

Stevens, Jane, 298n

Stierlein, Johann Christoph, 21, 30, 163

Stillingfleet, Benjamin, 198

String divisions, 9, 101-105, 194

Suaudeau, René, 95n

Subposition: in Rameau, 100, 108-114,
140; in Levens, 153; in Marpurg,
2IO—212, 213, 237, 251-252; in
Beethoven, Léhlein, Tirk, 210; in Koch,
210, 276, 278. See also Supposition

Sulzer, Johann Georg, 240, 255, 297

Supposition, 101, 108—109. See alse
Subposition

Suspensions, in Zarlino, 13-14. See also
Subposition

Tartini, Giuseppe, 197-200, 209

Telemann, Georg Michael, 257

Telemann, Georg Philipp, 31n, 50, 65,
202, 218, 219, 222, 224, 243

Temperament, 103

Theorbo, 51, 76, 99

Thoroughbass, 49-89, 182-183; and
diminution, 37, 63—68, 80-81; and
chords, 53—61; and dissonance, 61-65,
209-210; and composition, 65-68; and
unfigured basses, 69-82; compared to
Rameau, 142-143; in Daube, 200-204;
compared to Riepel, 265-267

Tinctoris, Joannes, 15, 27, 30, 118, 178n

Treiber, Johann Philipp, 50

Trias harmonica, 11, 97

Triple proportion, 132

Trydell, John, 207-208

Turk, Daniel Gottlob, 50, 59, 93, 135,
210, 2.56

Twelve-tone row, 173

Twittenhoff, Wilhelm, 259, 260

Underlying voice leading: in Artusi,
20-21; in Heinichen, 64, 79-81; in
Kirnberger, 245; in Riepel, 263-266; in
Koch, 285-286, 292-293

Unfigured basses, rules for, 43, 51, 69-82;
interpreted by Rameau, 119-122

Vallotti, Francesco Antonio, 182, 190,
209, 211, 257n

Verba, Cynthia, 131, 138n

Viadana, Lodovico Grossi da, 49, 50, 69n

Vial, Frangois-Guillaume, 229, 230

Vicentino, Nicola, 19


=== PAGE 365 ===

Vion, Charles Antoine, 154

Vogler, Georg Joseph, 208-209, 217-218,
234

Voltaire, 127, 144, 145, 149, 255

Wallace, Barbara, 200n, 201

Walther, Johann Gottfried, 2, 21n, 74, 86,
130, 158-159, 168, 170, 274

Wason, Robert, 109n, 204, 217

Weber, Gottfried, 208

Werckmeister, Andreas, 51, 53, 54, 55, 66,
70-71, 77, 96, 98, 118, 148-149, 170,
194, 215

Westbladh, Tobias, 125

Wideburg, Michael Johann Friedrich, 176,
215-216

Willaert, Adrian, 8, 11, 35

Wolff, Christoph, 24

Wollenberg, Susan, 48

Zacconi, Lodovico, 28, 30

Zarlino, Gioseffo, 8-20, 28, 34, 35, 45;
46, 53, 54, 95, LOI—102, 104, 118, 129
139, 178, 205n, 214, 215, 253

Zelenka, Jan Dismas, 259

Index

355


=== PAGE 366 ===

BLANK PAGE
